xxbos xxbos 1984 
▁ xxmaj george xxmaj orwell 
▁ 1949 
▁ xxmaj chapter 1 
▁ xxmaj it was a bright cold day in xxmaj april , and the clocks were striking thirteen . xxmaj winston 
▁ xxmaj smith , his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the vile wind , slipped 
▁ quickly through the glass doors of xxmaj victory xxmaj mansions , though not quickly enough 
▁ to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering along with him . 
▁ xxmaj the hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats . xxmaj at one end of it a 
▁ coloured poster , too large for indoor display , had been tacked to the wall . xxmaj it 
▁ depicted simply an enormous face , more than a metre wide : the face of a man of 
▁ about forty - five , with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome features . 
▁ xxmaj winston made for the stairs . xxmaj it was no use trying the lift . xxmaj even at the best 
▁ of times it was seldom working , and at present the electric current was cut off 
▁ during daylight hours . xxmaj it was part of the economy drive in preparation for xxmaj hate 
▁ xxmaj week . xxmaj the flat was seven flights up , and xxmaj winston , who was thirty - nine and had 
▁ a varicose ulcer above his right ankle , went slowly , resting several times on the 
▁ way . xxmaj on each landing , opposite the lift - shaft , the poster with the enormous face 
▁ gazed from the wall . xxmaj it was one of those pictures which are so contrived that 
▁ the eyes follow you about when you move . xxup big xxup brother xxup is xxup watching 
▁ xxup you , the caption beneath it ran . 
▁ xxmaj inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had 
▁ something to do with the production of pig - iron . xxmaj the voice came from an 
▁ oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the 
▁ right - hand wall . xxmaj winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat , though 
▁ the words were still distinguishable . xxmaj the instrument ( the telescreen , it was 
▁ called ) could be dimmed , but there was no way of shutting it off completely . xxmaj he 
▁ moved over to the window : a smallish , frail figure , the meagreness of his body 
▁ merely emphasized by the blue overalls which were the uniform of the party . 
▁ xxmaj his hair was very fair , his face naturally sanguine , his skin roughened by coarse 
▁ soap and blunt razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended . 
▁ xxmaj outside , even through the shut window - pane , the world looked cold . xxmaj down 
▁ in the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals , 
▁ and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue , there seemed to be 
▁ no colour in anything , except the posters that were plastered everywhere . xxmaj the 
▁ black - moustachio’d face gazed down from every commanding corner . xxmaj there was 
▁ one on the house - front immediately opposite . xxup big xxup brother xxup is xxup watching 
▁ xxup you , the caption said , while the dark eyes looked deep into xxmaj winston ’s own . 
▁ xxmaj down at streetlevel another poster , torn at one corner , flapped fitfully in the 
▁ wind , alternately covering and uncovering the single word xxup ingsoc . xxmaj in the far 
▁ distance a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs , hovered for an instant 
▁ 1 
▁ like a bluebottle , and darted away again with a curving flight . xxmaj it was the police 
▁ patrol , snooping into people ’s windows . xxmaj the patrols did not matter , however . 
▁ xxmaj only the xxmaj thought xxmaj police mattered . 
▁ xxmaj behind xxmaj winston ’s back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away 
▁ about pig - iron and the overfulfilment of the xxmaj ninth three - year xxmaj plan . xxmaj the telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously . xxmaj any sound that xxmaj winston made , 
▁ above the level of a very low whisper , would be picked up by it , moreover , so long 
▁ as he remained within the field of vision which the metal plaque commanded , he 
▁ could be seen as well as heard . xxmaj there was of course no way of knowing whether 
▁ you were being watched at any given moment . xxmaj how often , or on what system , 
▁ the xxmaj thought xxmaj police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork . xxmaj it was 
▁ even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time . xxmaj but at any rate 
▁ they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to . xxmaj you had to live — did 
▁ live , from habit that became instinct — in the assumption that every sound you 
▁ made was overheard , and , except in darkness , every movement scrutinized . 
▁ xxmaj winston kept his back turned to the telescreen . xxmaj it was safer , though , as 
▁ he well knew , even a back can be revealing . a kilometre away the xxmaj ministry of 
▁ xxmaj truth , his place of work , towered vast and white above the grimy landscape . 
▁ xxmaj this , he thought with a sort of vague distaste — this was xxmaj london , chief city 
▁ of xxmaj airstrip xxmaj one , itself the third most populous of the provinces of xxmaj oceania . 
▁ xxmaj he tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether 
▁ xxmaj london had always been quite like this . xxmaj were there always these vistas of 
▁ rotting nineteenth - century houses , their sides shored up with baulks of timber , 
▁ their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs with corrugated iron , 
▁ their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions ? xxmaj and the bombed sites where 
▁ the plaster dust swirled in the air and the willow - herb straggled over the heaps of 
▁ rubble ; and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had 
▁ sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chicken - houses ? xxmaj but it was no 
▁ use , he could not remember : nothing remained of his childhood except a series 
▁ of bright - lit tableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth — xxmaj minitrue , in xxmaj newspeak * — was startlingly different 
▁ from any other object in sight . xxmaj it was an enormous pyramidal structure of 
▁ glittering white concrete , soaring up , terrace after terrace , 300 metres into the 
▁ air . xxmaj from where xxmaj winston stood it was just possible to read , picked out on its 
▁ white face in elegant lettering , the three slogans of the xxmaj party : 
▁ xxup war xxup is xxup peace 
▁ xxup freedom xxup is xxup slavery 
▁ xxup ignorance xxup is xxup strength 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth contained , it was said , three thousand rooms above 
▁ ground level , and corresponding ramifications below . xxmaj scattered about xxmaj london 
▁ there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size . xxmaj so completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof of xxmaj victory 
▁ xxmaj mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously . xxmaj they were the homes 
▁ of the four xxmaj ministries between which the entire apparatus of government was 
▁ divided . xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth , which concerned itself with news , entertainment , education , and the fine arts . xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj peace , which concerned 
▁ itself with war . xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , which maintained law and order . xxmaj and 
▁ the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty , which was responsible for economic affairs . xxmaj their names , 
▁ in xxmaj newspeak : xxmaj minitrue , xxmaj minipax , xxmaj miniluv , and xxmaj miniplenty . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love was the really frightening one . xxmaj there were no windows 
▁ 2 
▁ in it at all . xxmaj winston had never been inside the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , nor within half 
▁ a kilometre of it . xxmaj it was a place impossible to enter except on official business , 
▁ and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbed - wire entanglements , 
▁ steel doors , and hidden machine - gun nests . xxmaj even the streets leading up to its 
▁ outer barriers were roamed by gorilla - faced guards in black uniforms , armed 
▁ with jointed truncheons . 
▁ xxmaj winston turned round abruptly . xxmaj he had set his features into the expression 
▁ of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing the telescreen . 
▁ xxmaj he crossed the room into the tiny kitchen . xxmaj by leaving the xxmaj ministry at this time 
▁ of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the canteen , and he was aware that there 
▁ was no food in the kitchen except a hunk of dark - coloured bread which had got 
▁ to be saved for tomorrow ’s breakfast . xxmaj he took down from the shelf a bottle 
▁ of colourless liquid with a plain white label marked xxup victory xxup gin . xxmaj it gave 
▁ off a sickly , oily smell , as of xxmaj chinese rice - spirit . xxmaj winston poured out nearly a 
▁ teacupful , nerved himself for a shock , and gulped it down like a dose of medicine . 
▁ xxmaj instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes . xxmaj the stuff 
▁ was like nitric acid , and moreover , in swallowing it one had the sensation of being 
▁ hit on the back of the head with a rubber club . xxmaj the next moment , however , 
▁ the burning in his belly died down and the world began to look more cheerful . 
▁ xxmaj he took a cigarette from a crumpled packet marked xxup victory xxup cigarettes 
▁ and incautiously held it upright , whereupon the tobacco fell out on to the floor . 
▁ xxmaj with the next he was more successful . xxmaj he went back to the living - room and sat 
▁ down at a small table that stood to the left of the telescreen . xxmaj from the table 
▁ drawer he took out a penholder , a bottle of ink , and a thick , quarto - sized blank 
▁ book with a red back and a marbled cover . 
▁ xxmaj for some reason the telescreen in the living - room was in an unusual position . 
▁ xxmaj instead of being placed , as was normal , in the end wall , where it could command 
▁ the whole room , it was in the longer wall , opposite the window . xxmaj to one side 
▁ of it there was a shallow alcove in which xxmaj winston was now sitting , and which , 
▁ when the flats were built , had probably been intended to hold bookshelves . xxmaj by 
▁ sitting in the alcove , and keeping well back , xxmaj winston was able to remain outside 
▁ the range of the telescreen , so far as sight went . xxmaj he could be heard , of course , 
▁ but so long as he stayed in his present position he could not be seen . xxmaj it was 
▁ partly the unusual geography of the room that had suggested to him the thing 
▁ that he was now about to do . 
▁ xxmaj but it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out of the 
▁ drawer . xxmaj it was a peculiarly beautiful book . xxmaj its smooth creamy paper , a little 
▁ yellowed by age , was of a kind that had not been manufactured for at least forty 
▁ years past . xxmaj he could guess , however , that the book was much older than that . 
▁ xxmaj he had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little junk - shop in a slummy 
▁ quarter of the town ( just what quarter he did not now remember ) and had been 
▁ stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire to possess it . xxmaj party members 
▁ were supposed not to go into ordinary shops ( ’ dealing on the free market ’ , it was 
▁ called ) , but the rule was not strictly kept , because there were various things , 
▁ such as shoelaces and razor blades , which it was impossible to get hold of in any 
▁ other way . xxmaj he had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had 
▁ slipped inside and bought the book for two dollars fifty . xxmaj at the time he was not 
▁ conscious of wanting it for any particular purpose . xxmaj he had carried it guiltily 
▁ home in his briefcase . xxmaj even with nothing written in it , it was a compromising 
▁ possession . 
▁ 3 
▁ xxmaj the thing that he was about to do was to open a diary . xxmaj this was not illegal 
▁ ( nothing was illegal , since there were no longer any laws ) , but if detected it was 
▁ reasonably certain that it would be punished by death , or at least by twentyfive years in a forced - labour camp . xxmaj winston fitted a nib into the penholder 
▁ and sucked it to get the grease off . xxmaj the pen was an archaic instrument , seldom 
▁ used even for signatures , and he had procured one , furtively and with some 
▁ difficulty , simply because of a feeling that the beautiful creamy paper deserved 
▁ to be written on with a real nib instead of being scratched with an ink - pencil . 
▁ xxmaj actually he was not used to writing by hand . xxmaj apart from very short notes , it was 
▁ usual to dictate everything into the speak - write which was of course impossible 
▁ for his present purpose . xxmaj he dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for 
▁ just a second . a tremor had gone through his bowels . xxmaj to mark the paper was 
▁ the decisive act . xxmaj in small clumsy letters he wrote : 
▁ xxmaj april 4th , 1984 . 
▁ xxmaj he sat back . a sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him . xxmaj to 
▁ begin with , he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984 . xxmaj it must be 
▁ round about that date , since he was fairly sure that his age was thirty - nine , and 
▁ he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945 ; but it was never possible 
▁ nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two . 
▁ xxmaj for whom , it suddenly occurred to him to wonder , was he writing this diary ? xxmaj for the future , for the unborn . xxmaj his mind hovered for a moment round 
▁ the doubtful date on the page , and then fetched up with a bump against the 
▁ xxmaj newspeak word doublethink . xxmaj for the first time the magnitude of what he had 
▁ undertaken came home to him . xxmaj how could you communicate with the future ? 
▁ xxmaj it was of its nature impossible . xxmaj either the future would resemble the present , 
▁ in which case it would not listen to him : or it would be different from it , and 
▁ his predicament would be meaningless . 
▁ xxmaj for some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper . xxmaj the telescreen had 
▁ changed over to strident military music . xxmaj it was curious that he seemed not 
▁ merely to have lost the power of expressing himself , but even to have forgotten 
▁ what it was that he had originally intended to say . xxmaj for weeks past he had been 
▁ making ready for this moment , and it had never crossed his mind that anything 
▁ would be needed except courage . xxmaj the actual writing would be easy . xxmaj all he had 
▁ to do was to transfer to paper the interminable restless monologue that had 
▁ been running inside his head , literally for years . xxmaj at this moment , however , even 
▁ the monologue had dried up . xxmaj moreover his varicose ulcer had begun itching 
▁ unbearably . xxmaj he dared not scratch it , because if he did so it always became 
▁ inflamed . xxmaj the seconds were ticking by . xxmaj he was conscious of nothing except the 
▁ blankness of the page in front of him , the itching of the skin above his ankle , 
▁ the blaring of the music , and a slight booziness caused by the gin . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly he began writing in sheer panic , only imperfectly aware of what 
▁ he was setting down . xxmaj his small but childish handwriting straggled up and down 
▁ the page , shedding first its capital letters and finally even its full stops : 
▁ xxmaj april 4th , 1984 . xxmaj last night to the flicks . xxmaj all war films . xxmaj one very good 
▁ one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the xxmaj mediterranean . 
▁ xxmaj audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away 
▁ with a helicopter after him , first you saw him wallowing along in the water like a 
▁ porpoise , then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights , then he was full 
▁ of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as suddenly as though 
▁ the holes had let in the water , audience shouting with laughter when he sank . 
▁ 4 
▁ then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a helicopter hovering over it . there 
▁ was a middle - aged woman might have been a jewess sitting up in the bow with 
▁ a little boy about three years old in her arms . little boy screaming with fright 
▁ and hiding his head between her breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into 
▁ her and the woman putting her arms round him and comforting him although 
▁ she was blue with fright herself , all the time covering him up as much as possible 
▁ as if she thought her arms could keep the bullets off him . then the helicopter 
▁ planted a 20 kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to 
▁ matchwood . then there was a wonderful shot of a child ’s arm going xxwrep 3 up 
▁ right up into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed 
▁ it up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in 
▁ the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting they 
▁ did nt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they did nt it ai nt right not in front 
▁ of kids it ai nt until the police turned her turned her out i do nt suppose anything 
▁ happened to her nobody cares what the proles say typical prole reaction they 
▁ never 
▁ xxmaj winston stopped writing , partly because he was suffering from cramp . xxmaj he 
▁ did not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish . xxmaj but the 
▁ curious thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had 
▁ clarified itself in his mind , to the point where he almost felt equal to writing 
▁ it down . xxmaj it was , he now realized , because of this other incident that he had 
▁ suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today . 
▁ xxmaj it had happened that morning at the xxmaj ministry , if anything so nebulous could 
▁ be said to happen . 
▁ xxmaj it was nearly eleven hundred , and in the xxmaj records xxmaj department , where xxmaj winston worked , they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping 
▁ them in the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen , in preparation for 
▁ the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate . xxmaj winston was just taking his place in one of the middle 
▁ rows when two people whom he knew by sight , but had never spoken to , came 
▁ unexpectedly into the room . xxmaj one of them was a girl whom he often passed 
▁ in the corridors . xxmaj he did not know her name , but he knew that she worked in 
▁ the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department . xxmaj presumably — since he had sometimes seen her with 
▁ oily hands and carrying a spanner she had some mechanical job on one of the 
▁ novel - writing machines . xxmaj she was a bold - looking girl , of about twenty - seven , 
▁ with thick hair , a freckled face , and swift , athletic movements . a narrow scarlet 
▁ sash , emblem of the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league , was wound several times round 
▁ the waist of her overalls , just tightly enough to bring out the shapeliness of her 
▁ hips . xxmaj winston had disliked her from the very first moment of seeing her . xxmaj he 
▁ knew the reason . xxmaj it was because of the atmosphere of hockey - fields and cold 
▁ baths and community hikes and general clean - mindedness which she managed 
▁ to carry about with her . xxmaj he disliked nearly all women , and especially the young 
▁ and pretty ones . xxmaj it was always the women , and above all the young ones , who 
▁ were the most bigoted adherents of the xxmaj party , the swallowers of slogans , the 
▁ amateur spies and nosers - out of unorthodoxy . xxmaj but this particular girl gave him 
▁ the impression of being more dangerous than most . xxmaj once when they passed in 
▁ the corridor she gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right 
▁ into him and for a moment had filled him with black terror . xxmaj the idea had even 
▁ crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . xxmaj that , it 
▁ was true , was very unlikely . xxmaj still , he continued to feel a peculiar uneasiness , 
▁ which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility , whenever she was anywhere 
▁ 5 
▁ near him . 
▁ xxmaj the other person was a man named o’brien , a member of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party 
▁ and holder of some post so important and remote that xxmaj winston had only a 
▁ dim idea of its nature . a momentary hush passed over the group of people 
▁ round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an xxmaj inner xxmaj party member approaching . o’brien was a large , burly man with a thick neck and a coarse , 
▁ humorous , brutal face . xxmaj in spite of his formidable appearance he had a certain 
▁ charm of manner . xxmaj he had a trick of resettling his spectacles on his nose which 
▁ was curiously disarming — in some indefinable way , curiously civilized . xxmaj it was a 
▁ gesture which , if anyone had still thought in such terms , might have recalled an 
▁ eighteenth - century nobleman offering his snuffbox . xxmaj winston had seen o’brien 
▁ perhaps a dozen times in almost as many years . xxmaj he felt deeply drawn to him , 
▁ and not solely because he was intrigued by the contrast between o’brien ’s urbane manner and his prize - fighter ’s physique . xxmaj much more it was because of 
▁ a secretly held belief — or perhaps not even a belief , merely a hope — that 
▁ o’brien ’s political orthodoxy was not perfect . xxmaj something in his face suggested 
▁ it irresistibly . xxmaj and again , perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written 
▁ in his face , but simply intelligence . xxmaj but at any rate he had the appearance of 
▁ being a person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen 
▁ and get him alone . xxmaj winston had never made the smallest effort to verify this 
▁ guess : indeed , there was no way of doing so . xxmaj at this moment o’brien glanced 
▁ at his wrist - watch , saw that it was nearly eleven hundred , and evidently decided 
▁ to stay in the xxmaj records xxmaj department until the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate was over . xxmaj he 
▁ took a chair in the same row as xxmaj winston , a couple of places away . a small , 
▁ sandy - haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to xxmaj winston was between 
▁ them . xxmaj the girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind . 
▁ xxmaj the next moment a hideous , grinding speech , as of some monstrous machine 
▁ running without oil , burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room . xxmaj it 
▁ was a noise that set one ’s teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the back of 
▁ one ’s neck . xxmaj the xxmaj hate had started . 
▁ xxmaj as usual , the face of xxmaj emmanuel xxmaj goldstein , the xxmaj enemy of the xxmaj people , had 
▁ flashed on to the screen . xxmaj there were hisses here and there among the audience . xxmaj the little sandy - haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and disgust . 
▁ xxmaj goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once , long ago ( how long ago , 
▁ nobody quite remembered ) , had been one of the leading figures of the xxmaj party , 
▁ almost on a level with xxmaj big xxmaj brother himself , and then had engaged in counterrevolutionary activities , had been condemned to death , and had mysteriously 
▁ escaped and disappeared . xxmaj the programmes of the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate varied 
▁ from day to day , but there was none in which xxmaj goldstein was not the principal 
▁ figure . xxmaj he was the primal traitor , the earliest defiler of the xxmaj party ’s purity . xxmaj all 
▁ subsequent crimes against the xxmaj party , all treacheries , acts of sabotage , heresies , 
▁ deviations , sprang directly out of his teaching . xxmaj somewhere or other he was still 
▁ alive and hatching his conspiracies : perhaps somewhere beyond the sea , under 
▁ the protection of his foreign paymasters , perhaps even — so it was occasionally 
▁ rumoured — in some hiding - place in xxmaj oceania itself . 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s diaphragm was constricted . xxmaj he could never see the face of xxmaj goldstein without a painful mixture of emotions . xxmaj it was a lean xxmaj jewish face , with a 
▁ great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard — a clever face , and 
▁ yet somehow inherently despicable , with a kind of senile silliness in the long thin 
▁ nose , near the end of which a pair of spectacles was perched . xxmaj it resembled the 
▁ 6 
▁ face of a sheep , and the voice , too , had a sheep - like quality . xxmaj goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack upon the doctrines of the xxmaj party — an attack 
▁ so exaggerated and perverse that a child should have been able to see through 
▁ it , and yet just plausible enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other 
▁ people , less level - headed than oneself , might be taken in by it . xxmaj he was abusing 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother , he was denouncing the dictatorship of the xxmaj party , he was demanding the immediate conclusion of peace with xxmaj eurasia , he was advocating freedom 
▁ of speech , freedom of the xxmaj press , freedom of assembly , freedom of thought , he 
▁ was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed — and all this 
▁ in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the habitual style of 
▁ the orators of the xxmaj party , and even contained xxmaj newspeak words : more xxmaj newspeak 
▁ words , indeed , than any xxmaj party member would normally use in real life . xxmaj and all 
▁ the while , lest one should be in any doubt as to the reality which xxmaj goldstein ’s 
▁ specious claptrap covered , behind his head on the telescreen there marched the 
▁ endless columns of the xxmaj eurasian army — row after row of solid - looking men 
▁ with expressionless xxmaj asiatic faces , who swam up to the surface of the screen and 
▁ vanished , to be replaced by others exactly similar . xxmaj the dull rhythmic tramp of 
▁ the soldiers ’ boots formed the background to xxmaj goldstein ’s bleating voice . 
▁ xxmaj before the xxmaj hate had proceeded for thirty seconds , uncontrollable exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room . xxmaj the selfsatisfied sheep - like face on the screen , and the terrifying power of the xxmaj eurasian 
▁ army behind it , were too much to be borne : besides , the sight or even the 
▁ thought of xxmaj goldstein produced fear and anger automatically . xxmaj he was an object 
▁ of hatred more constant than either xxmaj eurasia or xxmaj eastasia , since when xxmaj oceania 
▁ was at war with one of these xxmaj powers it was generally at peace with the other . 
▁ xxmaj but what was strange was that although xxmaj goldstein was hated and despised 
▁ by everybody , although every day and a thousand times a day , on platforms , 
▁ on the telescreen , in newspapers , in books , his theories were refuted , smashed , 
▁ ridiculed , held up to the general gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were in 
▁ spite of all this , his influence never seemed to grow less . xxmaj always there were 
▁ fresh dupes waiting to be seduced by him . a day never passed when spies and 
▁ saboteurs acting under his directions were not unmasked by the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . xxmaj he was the commander of a vast shadowy army , an underground network 
▁ of conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the xxmaj state . xxmaj the xxmaj brotherhood , its 
▁ name was supposed to be . xxmaj there were also whispered stories of a terrible book , 
▁ a compendium of all the heresies , of which xxmaj goldstein was the author and which 
▁ circulated clandestinely here and there . xxmaj it was a book without a title . xxmaj people 
▁ referred to it , if at all , simply as the book . xxmaj but one knew of such things only 
▁ through vague rumours . xxmaj neither the xxmaj brotherhood nor the book was a subject 
▁ that any ordinary xxmaj party member would mention if there was a way of avoiding 
▁ it . 
▁ xxmaj in its second minute the xxmaj hate rose to a frenzy . xxmaj people were leaping up 
▁ and down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort 
▁ to drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen . xxmaj the little 
▁ sandy - haired woman had turned bright pink , and her mouth was opening and 
▁ shutting like that of a landed fish . xxmaj even o’brien ’s heavy face was flushed . xxmaj he 
▁ was sitting very straight in his chair , his powerful chest swelling and quivering 
▁ as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave . xxmaj the dark - haired girl 
▁ behind xxmaj winston had begun crying out ’ swine ! xxmaj swine ! xxmaj swine ! ’ and suddenly 
▁ she picked up a heavy xxmaj newspeak dictionary and flung it at the screen . xxmaj it struck 
▁ 7 
▁ xxmaj goldstein ’s nose and bounced off ; the voice continued inexorably . xxmaj in a lucid 
▁ moment xxmaj winston found that he was shouting with the others and kicking his 
▁ heel violently against the rung of his chair . xxmaj the horrible thing about the xxmaj two 
▁ xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate was not that one was obliged to act a part , but , on the contrary , 
▁ that it was impossible to avoid joining in . xxmaj within thirty seconds any pretence 
▁ was always unnecessary . a hideous ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness , a desire 
▁ to kill , to torture , to smash faces in with a sledge - hammer , seemed to flow 
▁ through the whole group of people like an electric current , turning one even 
▁ against one ’s will into a grimacing , screaming lunatic . xxmaj and yet the rage that 
▁ one felt was an abstract , undirected emotion which could be switched from one 
▁ object to another like the flame of a blowlamp . xxmaj thus , at one moment xxmaj winston ’s 
▁ hatred was not turned against xxmaj goldstein at all , but , on the contrary , against 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother , the xxmaj party , and the xxmaj thought xxmaj police ; and at such moments his heart 
▁ went out to the lonely , derided heretic on the screen , sole guardian of truth and 
▁ sanity in a world of lies . xxmaj and yet the very next instant he was at one with the 
▁ people about him , and all that was said of xxmaj goldstein seemed to him to be true . 
▁ xxmaj at those moments his secret loathing of xxmaj big xxmaj brother changed into adoration , 
▁ and xxmaj big xxmaj brother seemed to tower up , an invincible , fearless protector , standing 
▁ like a rock against the hordes of xxmaj asia , and xxmaj goldstein , in spite of his isolation , 
▁ his helplessness , and the doubt that hung about his very existence , seemed like 
▁ some sinister enchanter , capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the 
▁ structure of civilization . 
▁ xxmaj it was even possible , at moments , to switch one ’s hatred this way or that 
▁ by a voluntary act . xxmaj suddenly , by the sort of violent effort with which one 
▁ wrenches one ’s head away from the pillow in a nightmare , xxmaj winston succeeded in 
▁ transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark - haired girl behind 
▁ him . xxmaj vivid , beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind . xxmaj he would flog 
▁ her to death with a rubber truncheon . xxmaj he would tie her naked to a stake and 
▁ shoot her full of arrows like xxmaj saint xxmaj sebastian . xxmaj he would ravish her and cut her 
▁ throat at the moment of climax . xxmaj better than before , moreover , he realized why 
▁ it was that he hated her . xxmaj he hated her because she was young and pretty and 
▁ sexless , because he wanted to go to bed with her and would never do so , because 
▁ round her sweet supple waist , which seemed to ask you to encircle it with your 
▁ arm , there was only the odious scarlet sash , aggressive symbol of chastity . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj hate rose to its climax . xxmaj the voice of xxmaj goldstein had become an actual 
▁ sheep ’s bleat , and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep . xxmaj then 
▁ the sheep - face melted into the figure of a xxmaj eurasian soldier who seemed to be advancing , huge and terrible , his sub - machine gun roaring , and seeming to spring 
▁ out of the surface of the screen , so that some of the people in the front row 
▁ actually flinched backwards in their seats . xxmaj but in the same moment , drawing a 
▁ deep sigh of relief from everybody , the hostile figure melted into the face of xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother , black - haired , black - moustachio’d , full of power and mysterious calm , 
▁ and so vast that it almost filled up the screen . xxmaj nobody heard what xxmaj big xxmaj brother 
▁ was saying . xxmaj it was merely a few words of encouragement , the sort of words that 
▁ are uttered in the din of battle , not distinguishable individually but restoring 
▁ confidence by the fact of being spoken . xxmaj then the face of xxmaj big xxmaj brother faded away 
▁ again , and instead the three slogans of the xxmaj party stood out in bold capitals : 
▁ xxup war xxup is xxup peace 
▁ xxup freedom xxup is xxup slavery 
▁ xxup ignorance xxup is xxup strength 
▁ 8 
▁ xxmaj but the face of xxmaj big xxmaj brother seemed to persist for several seconds on the 
▁ screen , as though the impact that it had made on everyone ’s eyeballs was too 
▁ vivid to wear off immediately . xxmaj the little sandy - haired woman had flung herself 
▁ forward over the back of the chair in front of her . xxmaj with a tremulous murmur 
▁ that sounded like ’ my xxmaj saviour ! ’ she extended her arms towards the screen . 
▁ xxmaj then she buried her face in her hands . xxmaj it was apparent that she was uttering a 
▁ prayer . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep , slow , rhythmical chant of ’ b - b ! … xxup b - b ! ’ — over and over again , very slowly , with a long 
▁ pause between the first ’ b ’ and the second - a heavy , murmurous sound , somehow curiously savage , in the background of which one seemed to hear the stamp 
▁ of naked feet and the throbbing of tom - toms . xxmaj for perhaps as much as thirty 
▁ seconds they kept it up . xxmaj it was a refrain that was often heard in moments of 
▁ overwhelming emotion . xxmaj partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom and majesty 
▁ of xxmaj big xxmaj brother , but still more it was an act of self - hypnosis , a deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise . xxmaj winston ’s entrails seemed to 
▁ grow cold . xxmaj in the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate he could not help sharing in the general 
▁ delirium , but this sub - human chanting of ’ b - b ! … xxup b - b ! ’ always filled him with 
▁ horror . xxmaj of course he chanted with the rest : it was impossible to do otherwise . 
▁ xxmaj to dissemble your feelings , to control your face , to do what everyone else was 
▁ doing , was an instinctive reaction . xxmaj but there was a space of a couple of seconds 
▁ during which the expression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him . 
▁ xxmaj and it was exactly at this moment that the significant thing happened — if , 
▁ indeed , it did happen . 
▁ xxmaj momentarily he caught o’brien ’s eye . o’brien had stood up . xxmaj he had taken 
▁ off his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose with his 
▁ characteristic gesture . xxmaj but there was a fraction of a second when their eyes 
▁ met , and for as long as it took to happen xxmaj winston knew — yes , he knew ! — 
▁ that o’brien was thinking the same thing as himself . xxmaj an unmistakable message 
▁ had passed . xxmaj it was as though their two minds had opened and the thoughts were 
▁ flowing from one into the other through their eyes . ’ i am with you , ’ o’brien 
▁ seemed to be saying to him . ’ i know precisely what you are feeling . i know all 
▁ about your contempt , your hatred , your disgust . xxmaj but do n’t worry , i am on your 
▁ side ! ’ xxmaj and then the flash of intelligence was gone , and o’brien ’s face was as 
▁ inscrutable as everybody else ’s . 
▁ xxmaj that was all , and he was already uncertain whether it had happened . xxmaj such 
▁ incidents never had any sequel . xxmaj all that they did was to keep alive in him 
▁ the belief , or hope , that others besides himself were the enemies of the xxmaj party . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true after all — 
▁ perhaps the xxmaj brotherhood really existed ! xxmaj it was impossible , in spite of the endless 
▁ arrests and confessions and executions , to be sure that the xxmaj brotherhood was 
▁ not simply a myth . xxmaj some days he believed in it , some days not . xxmaj there was no 
▁ evidence , only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything or nothing : snatches 
▁ of overheard conversation , faint scribbles on lavatory walls — once , even , when 
▁ two strangers met , a small movement of the hand which had looked as though 
▁ it might be a signal of recognition . xxmaj it was all guesswork : very likely he had 
▁ imagined everything . xxmaj he had gone back to his cubicle without looking at o’brien 
▁ again . xxmaj the idea of following up their momentary contact hardly crossed his 
▁ mind . xxmaj it would have been inconceivably dangerous even if he had known how to 
▁ set about doing it . xxmaj for a second , two seconds , they had exchanged an equivocal 
▁ 9 
▁ glance , and that was the end of the story . xxmaj but even that was a memorable event , 
▁ in the locked loneliness in which one had to live . 
▁ xxmaj winston roused himself and sat up straighter . xxmaj he let out a belch . xxmaj the gin 
▁ was rising from his stomach . 
▁ xxmaj his eyes re - focused on the page . xxmaj he discovered that while he sat helplessly 
▁ musing he had also been writing , as though by automatic action . xxmaj and it was 
▁ no longer the same cramped , awkward handwriting as before . xxmaj his pen had slid 
▁ voluptuously over the smooth paper , printing in large neat capitals 
▁ xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother 
▁ xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother 
▁ xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother 
▁ xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother 
▁ xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother 
▁ over and over again , filling half a page . 
▁ xxmaj he could not help feeling a twinge of panic . xxmaj it was absurd , since the writing 
▁ of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initial act of opening 
▁ the diary , but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the spoiled pages and 
▁ abandon the enterprise altogether . 
▁ xxmaj he did not do so , however , because he knew that it was useless . xxmaj whether 
▁ he wrote xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother , or whether he refrained from writing 
▁ it , made no difference . xxmaj whether he went on with the diary , or whether he did 
▁ not go on with it , made no difference . xxmaj the xxmaj thought xxmaj police would get him just 
▁ the same . xxmaj he had committed — would still have committed , even if he had 
▁ never set pen to paper — the essential crime that contained all others in itself . 
▁ xxmaj thoughtcrime , they called it . xxmaj thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be 
▁ concealed for ever . xxmaj you might dodge successfully for a while , even for years , but 
▁ sooner or later they were bound to get you . 
▁ xxmaj it was always at night — the arrests invariably happened at night . xxmaj the 
▁ sudden jerk out of sleep , the rough hand shaking your shoulder , the lights glaring 
▁ in your eyes , the ring of hard faces round the bed . xxmaj in the vast majority of cases 
▁ there was no trial , no report of the arrest . xxmaj people simply disappeared , always 
▁ during the night . xxmaj your name was removed from the registers , every record of 
▁ everything you had ever done was wiped out , your one - time existence was denied 
▁ and then forgotten . xxmaj you were abolished , annihilated : vaporized was the usual 
▁ word . 
▁ xxmaj for a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria . xxmaj he began writing in a 
▁ hurried untidy scrawl : 
▁ they ll shoot me i do n’t care they ll shoot me in the back of the neck i do nt 
▁ care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of the neck i do nt 
▁ care down with big brother 
▁ xxmaj he sat back in his chair , slightly ashamed of himself , and laid down the pen . 
▁ xxmaj the next moment he started violently . xxmaj there was a knocking at the door . 
▁ xxmaj already ! xxmaj he sat as still as a mouse , in the futile hope that whoever it was 
▁ might go away after a single attempt . xxmaj but no , the knocking was repeated . xxmaj the 
▁ worst thing of all would be to delay . xxmaj his heart was thumping like a drum , but 
▁ his face , from long habit , was probably expressionless . xxmaj he got up and moved 
▁ heavily towards the door . 
▁ 10 
▁ xxmaj chapter 2 
▁ xxmaj as he put his hand to the door - knob xxmaj winston saw that he had left the diary 
▁ open on the table . xxup down xxup with xxup big xxup brother was written all over it , in 
▁ letters almost big enough to be legible across the room . xxmaj it was an inconceivably 
▁ stupid thing to have done . xxmaj but , he realized , even in his panic he had not wanted 
▁ to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the book while the ink was wet . 
▁ xxmaj he drew in his breath and opened the door . xxmaj instantly a warm wave of relief 
▁ flowed through him . a colourless , crushed - looking woman , with wispy hair and 
▁ a lined face , was standing outside . 
▁ ’ oh , comrade , ’ she began in a dreary , whining sort of voice , ’ i thought i 
▁ heard you come in . xxmaj do you think you could come across and have a look at our 
▁ kitchen sink ? xxmaj it ’s got blocked up and- ’ 
▁ xxmaj it was xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , the wife of a neighbour on the same floor . ( ’ mrs ’ was 
▁ a word somewhat discountenanced by the xxmaj party — you were supposed to call 
▁ everyone ’ comrade ’ — but with some women one used it instinctively . ) xxmaj she 
▁ was a woman of about thirty , but looking much older . xxmaj one had the impression 
▁ that there was dust in the creases of her face . xxmaj winston followed her down the 
▁ passage . xxmaj these amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irritation . xxmaj victory 
▁ xxmaj mansions were old flats , built in 1930 or thereabouts , and were falling to pieces . 
▁ xxmaj the plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and walls , the pipes burst in every 
▁ hard frost , the roof leaked whenever there was snow , the heating system was 
▁ usually running at half steam when it was not closed down altogether from 
▁ motives of economy . xxmaj repairs , except what you could do for yourself , had to be 
▁ sanctioned by remote committees which were liable to hold up even the mending 
▁ of a window - pane for two years . 
▁ ’ of course it ’s only because xxmaj tom is n’t home , ’ said xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons vaguely . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj parsons ’ flat was bigger than xxmaj winston ’s , and dingy in a different way . 
▁ xxmaj everything had a battered , trampled - on look , as though the place had just been 
▁ visited by some large violent animal . xxmaj games impedimenta — hockey - sticks , 
▁ boxing - gloves . a burst football , a pair of sweaty shorts turned inside out — lay 
▁ all over the floor , and on the table there was a litter of dirty dishes and dogeared exercise - books . xxmaj on the walls were scarlet banners of the xxmaj youth xxmaj league 
▁ and the xxmaj spies , and a full - sized poster of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj there was the usual 
▁ boiled - cabbage smell , common to the whole building , but it was shot through 
▁ by a sharper reek of sweat , which - one knew this at the first sniff , though it was 
▁ hard to say how was the sweat of some person not present at the moment . xxmaj in 
▁ another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was trying to 
▁ keep tune with the military music which was still issuing from the telescreen . 
▁ 11 
▁ ’ it ’s the children , ’ said xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , casting a half - apprehensive glance at 
▁ the door . ’ they have n’t been out today . xxmaj and of course- ’ 
▁ xxmaj she had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the middle . xxmaj the kitchen 
▁ sink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt worse 
▁ than ever of cabbage . xxmaj winston knelt down and examined the angle - joint of the 
▁ pipe . xxmaj he hated using his hands , and he hated bending down , which was always 
▁ liable to start him coughing . xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons looked on helplessly . 
▁ ’ of course if xxmaj tom was home he ’d put it right in a moment , ’ she said . ’ he 
▁ loves anything like that . xxmaj he ’s ever so good with his hands , xxmaj tom is . ’ 
▁ xxmaj parsons was xxmaj winston ’s fellow - employee at the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth . xxmaj he was a 
▁ fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity , a mass of imbecile enthusiasms — 
▁ one of those completely unquestioning , devoted drudges on whom , more even 
▁ than on the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , the stability of the xxmaj party depended . xxmaj at thirtyfive he had just been unwillingly evicted from the xxmaj youth xxmaj league , and before 
▁ graduating into the xxmaj youth xxmaj league he had managed to stay on in the xxmaj spies for 
▁ a year beyond the statutory age . xxmaj at the xxmaj ministry he was employed in some 
▁ subordinate post for which intelligence was not required , but on the other hand 
▁ he was a leading figure on the xxmaj sports xxmaj committee and all the other committees 
▁ engaged in organizing community hikes , spontaneous demonstrations , savings 
▁ campaigns , and voluntary activities generally . xxmaj he would inform you with quiet 
▁ pride , between whiffs of his pipe , that he had put in an appearance at the 
▁ xxmaj community xxmaj centre every evening for the past four years . xxmaj an overpowering 
▁ smell of sweat , a sort of unconscious testimony to the strenuousness of his life , 
▁ followed him about wherever he went , and even remained behind him after he 
▁ had gone . 
▁ ‘ have you got a spanner ? ’ said xxmaj winston , fiddling with the nut on the anglejoint . 
▁ ‘ a spanner , ’ said xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , immediately becoming invertebrate . ‘ i do n’t 
▁ know , xxmaj i ’ m sure . xxmaj perhaps the children - ’ 
▁ xxmaj there was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as the children 
▁ charged into the living - room . xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons brought the spanner . xxmaj winston let 
▁ out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair that had blocked 
▁ up the pipe . xxmaj he cleaned his fingers as best he could in the cold water from the 
▁ tap and went back into the other room . 
▁ ’ up with your hands ! ’ yelled a savage voice . 
▁ a handsome , tough - looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the 
▁ table and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol , while his small sister , 
▁ about two years younger , made the same gesture with a fragment of wood . xxmaj both 
▁ of them were dressed in the blue shorts , grey shirts , and red neckerchiefs which 
▁ were the uniform of the xxmaj spies . xxmaj winston raised his hands above his head , but 
▁ with an uneasy feeling , so vicious was the boy ’s demeanour , that it was not 
▁ altogether a game . 
▁ ‘ you ’re a traitor ! ’ yelled the boy . ‘ you ’re a thought - criminal ! xxmaj you ’re a 
▁ xxmaj eurasian spy ! xxmaj i ’ll shoot you , xxmaj i ’ll vaporize you , xxmaj i ’ll send you to the salt mines ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj suddenly they were both leaping round him , shouting ’ traitor ! ’ and ’ thoughtcriminal ! ’ the little girl imitating her brother in every movement . xxmaj it was somehow slightly frightening , like the gambolling of tiger cubs which will soon grow 
▁ up into man - eaters . xxmaj there was a sort of calculating ferocity in the boy ’s eye , 
▁ a quite evident desire to hit or kick xxmaj winston and a consciousness of being very 
▁ nearly big enough to do so . xxmaj it was a good job it was not a real pistol he was 
▁ 12 
▁ holding , xxmaj winston thought . 
▁ xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons ’ eyes flitted nervously from xxmaj winston to the children , and back 
▁ again . xxmaj in the better light of the living - room he noticed with interest that there 
▁ actually was dust in the creases of her face . 
▁ ’ they do get so noisy , ’ she said . ’ they ’re disappointed because they could n’t 
▁ go to see the hanging , that ’s what it is . xxmaj i ’ m too busy to take them . and xxmaj tom 
▁ wo n’t be back from work in time . ’ 
▁ ’ why ca n’t we go and see the hanging ? ’ roared the boy in his huge voice . 
▁ ’ want to see the hanging ! xxmaj want to see the hanging ! ’ chanted the little girl , 
▁ still capering round . 
▁ xxmaj some xxmaj eurasian prisoners , guilty of war crimes , were to be hanged in the 
▁ xxmaj park that evening , xxmaj winston remembered . xxmaj this happened about once a month , 
▁ and was a popular spectacle . xxmaj children always clamoured to be taken to see 
▁ it . xxmaj he took his leave of xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons and made for the door . xxmaj but he had not 
▁ gone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an 
▁ agonizingly painful blow . xxmaj it was as though a red - hot wire had been jabbed into 
▁ him . xxmaj he spun round just in time to see xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons dragging her son back into 
▁ the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult . 
▁ ’ goldstein ! ’ bellowed the boy as the door closed on him . xxmaj but what most 
▁ struck xxmaj winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman ’s greyish face . 
▁ xxmaj back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the 
▁ table again , still rubbing his neck . xxmaj the music from the telescreen had stopped . 
▁ xxmaj instead , a clipped military voice was reading out , with a sort of brutal relish , a 
▁ description of the armaments of the new xxmaj floating xxmaj fortress which had just been 
▁ anchored between lceland and the xxmaj faroe lslands . 
▁ xxmaj with those children , he thought , that wretched woman must lead a life of 
▁ terror . xxmaj another year , two years , and they would be watching her night and 
▁ day for symptoms of unorthodoxy . xxmaj nearly all children nowadays were horrible . 
▁ xxmaj what was worst of all was that by means of such organizations as the xxmaj spies 
▁ they were systematically turned into ungovernable little savages , and yet this 
▁ produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the discipline of the 
▁ xxmaj party . xxmaj on the contrary , they adored the xxmaj party and everything connected with 
▁ it . xxmaj the songs , the processions , the banners , the hiking , the drilling with dummy 
▁ rifles , the yelling of slogans , the worship of xxmaj big xxmaj brother — it was all a sort of 
▁ glorious game to them . xxmaj all their ferocity was turned outwards , against the 
▁ enemies of the xxmaj state , against foreigners , traitors , saboteurs , thought - criminals . 
▁ xxmaj it was almost normal for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children . 
▁ xxmaj and with good reason , for hardly a week passed in which xxmaj the xxmaj times did not 
▁ carry a paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak — ’ child hero ’ 
▁ was the phrase generally used — had overheard some compromising remark and 
▁ denounced its parents to the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . 
▁ xxmaj the sting of the catapult bullet had worn off . xxmaj he picked up his pen halfheartedly , wondering whether he could find something more to write in the 
▁ diary . xxmaj suddenly he began thinking of o’brien again . 
▁ xxmaj years ago — how long was it ? xxmaj seven years it must be — he had dreamed 
▁ that he was walking through a pitch - dark room . xxmaj and someone sitting to one 
▁ side of him had said as he passed : ’ we shall meet in the place where there is 
▁ no darkness . ’ xxmaj it was said very quietly , almost casually — a statement , not a 
▁ command . xxmaj he had walked on without pausing . xxmaj what was curious was that at 
▁ the time , in the dream , the words had not made much impression on him . xxmaj it 
▁ 13 
▁ was only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance . xxmaj he 
▁ could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream that 
▁ he had seen o’brien for the first time , nor could he remember when he had first 
▁ identified the voice as o’brien ’s . xxmaj but at any rate the identification existed . xxmaj it 
▁ was o’brien who had spoken to him out of the dark . 
▁ xxmaj winston had never been able to feel sure — even after this morning ’s flash 
▁ of the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether o’brien was a friend 
▁ or an enemy . xxmaj nor did it even seem to matter greatly . xxmaj there was a link of 
▁ understanding between them , more important than affection or partisanship . 
▁ ’ we shall meet in the place where there is no darkness , ’ he had said . xxmaj winston 
▁ did not know what it meant , only that in some way or another it would come 
▁ true . 
▁ xxmaj the voice from the telescreen paused . a trumpet call , clear and beautiful , 
▁ floated into the stagnant air . xxmaj the voice continued raspingly : 
▁ ’ attention ! xxmaj your attention , please ! a newsflash has this moment arrived 
▁ from the xxmaj malabar front . xxmaj our forces in xxmaj south xxmaj india have won a glorious victory . 
▁ i am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting may well bring the 
▁ war within measurable distance of its end . xxmaj here is the newsflash - ’ 
▁ xxmaj bad news coming , thought xxmaj winston . xxmaj and sure enough , following on a gory 
▁ description of the annihilation of a xxmaj eurasian army , with stupendous figures 
▁ of killed and prisoners , came the announcement that , as from next week , the 
▁ chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty . 
▁ xxmaj winston belched again . xxmaj the gin was wearing off , leaving a deflated feeling . 
▁ xxmaj the telescreen — perhaps to celebrate the victory , perhaps to drown the memory 
▁ of the lost chocolate — crashed into ’ oceania , ’ tis for thee ’ . xxmaj you were supposed 
▁ to stand to attention . xxmaj however , in his present position he was invisible . 
▁ ’ oceania , ’ tis for thee ’ gave way to lighter music . xxmaj winston walked over to 
▁ the window , keeping his back to the telescreen . xxmaj the day was still cold and clear . 
▁ xxmaj somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull , reverberating roar . 
▁ xxmaj about twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on xxmaj london at present . 
▁ xxmaj down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro , and the 
▁ word xxup ingsoc fitfully appeared and vanished . xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj the sacred principles of 
▁ xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj newspeak , doublethink , the mutability of the past . xxmaj he felt as though 
▁ he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom , lost in a monstrous world 
▁ where he himself was the monster . xxmaj he was alone . xxmaj the past was dead , the future 
▁ was unimaginable . xxmaj what certainty had he that a single human creature now 
▁ living was on his side ? xxmaj and what way of knowing that the dominion of the xxmaj party 
▁ would not endure for ever ? xxmaj like an answer , the three slogans on the white face 
▁ of the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth came back to him : 
▁ xxup war xxup is xxup peace 
▁ xxup freedom xxup is xxup slavery 
▁ xxup ignorance xxup is xxup strength 
▁ xxmaj he took a twenty - five cent piece out of his pocket . xxmaj there , too , in tiny clear 
▁ lettering , the same slogans were inscribed , and on the other face of the coin the 
▁ head of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj even from the coin the eyes pursued you . xxmaj on coins , on 
▁ stamps , on the covers of books , on banners , on posters , and on the wrappings of 
▁ a cigarette xxmaj packet — everywhere . xxmaj always the eyes watching you and the voice 
▁ enveloping you . xxmaj asleep or awake , working or eating , indoors or out of doors , in 
▁ the bath or in bed — no escape . xxmaj nothing was your own except the few cubic 
▁ centimetres inside your skull . 
▁ 14 
▁ xxmaj the sun had shifted round , and the myriad windows of the xxmaj ministry of 
▁ xxmaj truth , with the light no longer shining on them , looked grim as the loopholes of 
▁ a fortress . xxmaj his heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape . xxmaj it was too 
▁ strong , it could not be stormed . a thousand rocket bombs would not batter it 
▁ down . xxmaj he wondered again for whom he was writing the diary . xxmaj for the future , 
▁ for the past — for an age that might be imaginary . xxmaj and in front of him there lay 
▁ not death but annihilation . xxmaj the diary would be reduced to ashes and himself 
▁ to vapour . xxmaj only the xxmaj thought xxmaj police would read what he had written , before 
▁ they wiped it out of existence and out of memory . xxmaj how could you make appeal 
▁ to the future when not a trace of you , not even an anonymous word scribbled 
▁ on a piece of paper , could physically survive ? 
▁ xxmaj the telescreen struck fourteen . xxmaj he must leave in ten minutes . xxmaj he had to be 
▁ back at work by fourteen - thirty . 
▁ xxmaj curiously , the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him . 
▁ xxmaj he was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear . xxmaj but so 
▁ long as he uttered it , in some obscure way the continuity was not broken . xxmaj it 
▁ was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on the 
▁ human heritage . xxmaj he went back to the table , dipped his pen , and wrote : 
▁ xxmaj to the future or to the past , to a time when thought is free , when men are 
▁ different from one another and do not live alone — to a time when truth exists 
▁ and what is done can not be undone : 
▁ xxmaj from the age of uniformity , from the age of solitude , from the age of xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother , from the age of doublethink — greetings ! 
▁ xxmaj he was already dead , he reflected . xxmaj it seemed to him that it was only now , 
▁ when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts , that he had taken the 
▁ decisive step . xxmaj the consequences of every act are included in the act itself . xxmaj he 
▁ wrote : 
▁ xxmaj thoughtcrime does not entail death : thoughtcrime xxup is death . 
▁ xxmaj now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stay 
▁ alive as long as possible . xxmaj two fingers of his right hand were inkstained . xxmaj it was 
▁ exactly the kind of detail that might betray you . xxmaj some nosing zealot in the 
▁ xxmaj ministry ( a woman , probably : someone like the little sandy - haired woman or 
▁ the dark - haired girl from the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department ) might start wondering why he 
▁ had been writing during the lunch interval , why he had used an old - fashioned 
▁ pen , what he had been writing — and then drop a hint in the appropriate 
▁ quarter . xxmaj he went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed the ink away with 
▁ the gritty dark - brown soap which rasped your skin like sandpaper and was 
▁ therefore well adapted for this purpose . 
▁ xxmaj he put the diary away in the drawer . xxmaj it was quite useless to think of hiding it , 
▁ but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had been discovered . 
▁ a hair laid across the page - ends was too obvious . xxmaj with the tip of his finger he 
▁ picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust and deposited it on the corner of 
▁ the cover , where it was bound to be shaken off if the book was moved . 
▁ 15 
▁ xxmaj chapter 3 
▁ xxmaj winston was dreaming of his mother . 
▁ xxmaj he must , he thought , have been ten or eleven years old when his mother 
▁ had disappeared . xxmaj she was a tall , statuesque , rather silent woman with slow 
▁ movements and magnificent fair hair . xxmaj his father he remembered more vaguely 
▁ as dark and thin , dressed always in neat dark clothes ( winston remembered 
▁ especially the very thin soles of his father ’s shoes ) and wearing spectacles . xxmaj the 
▁ two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one of the first great 
▁ purges of the fifties . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath 
▁ him , with his young sister in her arms . xxmaj he did not remember his sister at all , 
▁ except as a tiny , feeble baby , always silent , with large , watchful eyes . xxmaj both of 
▁ them were looking up at him . xxmaj they were down in some subterranean place — 
▁ the bottom of a well , for instance , or a very deep grave — but it was a place 
▁ which , already far below him , was itself moving downwards . xxmaj they were in the 
▁ saloon of a sinking ship , looking up at him through the darkening water . xxmaj there 
▁ was still air in the saloon , they could still see him and he them , but all the while 
▁ they were sinking down , down into the green waters which in another moment 
▁ must hide them from sight for ever . xxmaj he was out in the light and air while they 
▁ were being sucked down to death , and they were down there because he was 
▁ up here . xxmaj he knew it and they knew it , and he could see the knowledge in their 
▁ faces . xxmaj there was no reproach either in their faces or in their hearts , only the 
▁ knowledge that they must die in order that he might remain alive , and that this 
▁ was part of the unavoidable order of things . 
▁ xxmaj he could not remember what had happened , but he knew in his dream that in 
▁ some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his own . xxmaj it 
▁ was one of those dreams which , while retaining the characteristic dream scenery , 
▁ are a continuation of one ’s intellectual life , and in which one becomes aware of 
▁ facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable after one is awake . xxmaj the thing 
▁ that now suddenly struck xxmaj winston was that his mother ’s death , nearly thirty 
▁ years ago , had been tragic and sorrowful in a way that was no longer possible . 
▁ xxmaj tragedy , he perceived , belonged to the ancient time , to a time when there was 
▁ still privacy , love , and friendship , and when the members of a family stood by 
▁ one another without needing to know the reason . xxmaj his mother ’s memory tore at 
▁ his heart because she had died loving him , when he was too young and selfish 
▁ to love her in return , and because somehow , he did not remember how , she had 
▁ sacrificed herself to a conception of loyalty that was private and unalterable . 
▁ xxmaj such things , he saw , could not happen today . xxmaj today there were fear , hatred , 
▁ 16 
▁ and pain , but no dignity of emotion , no deep or complex sorrows . xxmaj all this he 
▁ seemed to see in the large eyes of his mother and his sister , looking up at him 
▁ through the green water , hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly he was standing on short springy turf , on a summer evening when 
▁ the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground . xxmaj the landscape that he was looking 
▁ at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain whether or not 
▁ he had seen it in the real world . xxmaj in his waking thoughts he called it the xxmaj golden 
▁ xxmaj country . xxmaj it was an old , rabbit - bitten pasture , with a foot - track wandering 
▁ across it and a molehill here and there . xxmaj in the ragged hedge on the opposite 
▁ side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were swaying very faintly in the 
▁ breeze , their leaves just stirring in dense masses like women ’s hair . xxmaj somewhere 
▁ near at hand , though out of sight , there was a clear , slow - moving stream where 
▁ dace were swimming in the pools under the willow trees . 
▁ xxmaj the girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field . xxmaj with what 
▁ seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them disdainfully 
▁ aside . xxmaj her body was white and smooth , but it aroused no desire in him , indeed 
▁ he barely looked at it . xxmaj what overwhelmed him in that instant was admiration 
▁ for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside . xxmaj with its grace 
▁ and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture , a whole system of 
▁ thought , as though xxmaj big xxmaj brother and the xxmaj party and the xxmaj thought xxmaj police could all 
▁ be swept into nothingness by a single splendid movement of the arm . xxmaj that too 
▁ was a gesture belonging to the ancient time . xxmaj winston woke up with the word 
▁ ’ shakespeare ’ on his lips . 
▁ xxmaj the telescreen was giving forth an ear - splitting whistle which continued on 
▁ the same note for thirty seconds . xxmaj it was nought seven fifteen , getting - up time for 
▁ office workers . xxmaj winston wrenched his body out of bed — naked , for a member 
▁ of the xxmaj outer xxmaj party received only 3 , xxrep 3 0 clothing coupons annually , and a suit of 
▁ pyjamas was 600 — and seized a dingy singlet and a pair of shorts that were 
▁ lying across a chair . xxmaj the xxmaj physical xxmaj jerks would begin in three minutes . xxmaj the 
▁ next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit which nearly always 
▁ attacked him soon after waking up . xxmaj it emptied his lungs so completely that he 
▁ could only begin breathing again by lying on his back and taking a series of 
▁ deep gasps . xxmaj his veins had swelled with the effort of the cough , and the varicose 
▁ ulcer had started itching . 
▁ ’ thirty to forty group ! ’ yapped a piercing female voice . ’ xxmaj thirty to forty 
▁ group ! xxmaj take your places , please . xxmaj thirties to forties ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen , upon which the image 
▁ of a youngish woman , scrawny but muscular , dressed in tunic and gym - shoes , 
▁ had already appeared . 
▁ ’ arms bending and stretching ! ’ she rapped out . ’ take your time by me . 
▁ xxmaj one , two , three , four ! xxmaj one , two , three , four ! xxmaj come on , comrades , put a bit of 
▁ life into it ! xxmaj one , two , three four ! xxmaj one two , three , four ! . . . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of xxmaj winston ’s mind 
▁ the impression made by his dream , and the rhythmic movements of the exercise 
▁ restored it somewhat . xxmaj as he mechanically shot his arms back and forth , wearing 
▁ on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered proper during the 
▁ xxmaj physical xxmaj jerks , he was struggling to think his way backward into the dim period 
▁ of his early childhood . xxmaj it was extraordinarily difficult . xxmaj beyond the late fifties 
▁ everything faded . xxmaj when there were no external records that you could refer 
▁ to , even the outline of your own life lost its sharpness . xxmaj you remembered huge 
▁ 17 
▁ events which had quite probably not happened , you remembered the detail of 
▁ incidents without being able to recapture their atmosphere , and there were long 
▁ blank periods to which you could assign nothing . xxmaj everything had been different 
▁ then . xxmaj even the names of countries , and their shapes on the map , had been 
▁ different . xxmaj airstrip xxmaj one , for instance , had not been so called in those days : it 
▁ had been called xxmaj england or xxmaj britain , though xxmaj london , he felt fairly certain , had 
▁ always been called xxmaj london . 
▁ xxmaj winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not 
▁ been at war , but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of 
▁ peace during his childhood , because one of his early memories was of an air raid 
▁ which appeared to take everyone by surprise . xxmaj perhaps it was the time when 
▁ the atomic bomb had fallen on xxmaj colchester . xxmaj he did not remember the raid itself , 
▁ but he did remember his father ’s hand clutching his own as they hurried down , 
▁ down , down into some place deep in the earth , round and round a spiral staircase 
▁ which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied his legs that he began 
▁ whimpering and they had to stop and rest . xxmaj his mother , in her slow , dreamy 
▁ way , was following a long way behind them . xxmaj she was carrying his baby sister — 
▁ or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets that she was carrying : he was not 
▁ certain whether his sister had been born then . xxmaj finally they had emerged into a 
▁ noisy , crowded place which he had realized to be a xxmaj tube station . 
▁ xxmaj there were people sitting all over the stone - flagged floor , and other people , 
▁ packed tightly together , were sitting on metal bunks , one above the other . xxmaj winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on the floor , and near 
▁ them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by side on a bunk . xxmaj the 
▁ old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap pushed back from 
▁ very white hair : his face was scarlet and his eyes were blue and full of tears . 
▁ xxmaj he reeked of gin . xxmaj it seemed to breathe out of his skin in place of sweat , and 
▁ one could have fancied that the tears welling from his eyes were pure gin . xxmaj but 
▁ though slightly drunk he was also suffering under some grief that was genuine 
▁ and unbearable . xxmaj in his childish way xxmaj winston grasped that some terrible thing , 
▁ something that was beyond forgiveness and could never be remedied , had just 
▁ happened . xxmaj it also seemed to him that he knew what it was . xxmaj someone whom the 
▁ old man loved — a little granddaughter , perhaps had been killed . xxmaj every few 
▁ minutes the old man kept repeating : 
▁ ’ we did n’t ought to ’ ave trusted ’em . i said so , xxmaj ma , did n’t xxup i ? xxmaj that ’s what 
▁ comes of trusting ’em . i said so all along . xxmaj we did n’t ought to ’ ave trusted the 
▁ buggers . 
▁ xxmaj but which buggers they did n’t ought to have trusted xxmaj winston could not now 
▁ remember . 
▁ xxmaj since about that time , war had been literally continuous , though strictly 
▁ speaking it had not always been the same war . xxmaj for several months during 
▁ his childhood there had been confused street fighting in xxmaj london itself , some of 
▁ which he remembered vividly . xxmaj but to trace out the history of the whole period , 
▁ to say who was fighting whom at any given moment , would have been utterly 
▁ impossible , since no written record , and no spoken word , ever made mention 
▁ of any other alignment than the existing one . xxmaj at this moment , for example , 
▁ in 1984 ( if it was 1984 ) , xxmaj oceania was at war with xxmaj eurasia and in alliance with 
▁ xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj in no public or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three 
▁ powers had at any time been grouped along different lines . xxmaj actually , as xxmaj winston 
▁ well knew , it was only four years since xxmaj oceania had been at war with xxmaj eastasia 
▁ 18 
▁ and in alliance with xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj but that was merely a piece of furtive knowledge 
▁ which he happened to possess because his memory was not satisfactorily under 
▁ control . xxmaj officially the change of partners had never happened . xxmaj oceania was at 
▁ war with xxmaj eurasia : therefore xxmaj oceania had always been at war with xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj the 
▁ enemy of the moment always represented absolute evil , and it followed that any 
▁ past or future agreement with him was impossible . 
▁ xxmaj the frightening thing , he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he forced 
▁ his shoulders painfully backward ( with hands on hips , they were gyrating their 
▁ bodies from the waist , an exercise that was supposed to be good for the back 
▁ muscles ) — the frightening thing was that it might all be true . xxmaj if the xxmaj party could 
▁ thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event , it never happened 
▁ — that , surely , was more terrifying than mere torture and death ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj party said that xxmaj oceania had never been in alliance with xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj he , 
▁ xxmaj winston xxmaj smith , knew that xxmaj oceania had been in alliance with xxmaj eurasia as short 
▁ a time as four years ago . xxmaj but where did that knowledge exist ? xxmaj only in his own 
▁ consciousness , which in any case must soon be annihilated . xxmaj and if all others 
▁ accepted the lie which the xxmaj party imposed -if all records told the same tale — 
▁ then the lie passed into history and became truth . ’ who controls the past , ’ ran 
▁ the xxmaj party slogan , ’ controls the future : who controls the present controls the 
▁ past . ’ xxmaj and yet the past , though of its nature alterable , never had been altered . 
▁ xxmaj whatever was true now was true from everlasting to everlasting . xxmaj it was quite 
▁ simple . xxmaj all that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own 
▁ memory . ’ reality control ’ , they called it : in xxmaj newspeak , ’ doublethink ’ 
▁ ’ stand easy ! ’ barked the instructress , a little more genially . 
▁ xxmaj winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with air . xxmaj his 
▁ mind slid away into the labyrinthine world of doublethink . xxmaj to know and not 
▁ to know , to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling carefully constructed lies , to hold simultaneously two opinions which cancelled out , knowing 
▁ them to be contradictory and believing in both of them , to use logic against 
▁ logic , to repudiate morality while laying claim to it , to believe that democracy 
▁ was impossible and that the xxmaj party was the guardian of democracy , to forget 
▁ whatever it was necessary to forget , then to draw it back into memory again 
▁ at the moment when it was needed , and then promptly to forget it again : and 
▁ above all , to apply the same process to the process itself . xxmaj that was the ultimate subtlety : consciously to induce unconsciousness , and then , once again , to 
▁ become unconscious of the act of hypnosis you had just performed . xxmaj even to 
▁ understand the word ’ doublethink ’ involved the use of doublethink . 
▁ xxmaj the instructress had called them to attention again . ’ and now let ’s see 
▁ which of us can touch our toes ! ’ she said enthusiastically . ’ right over from the 
▁ hips , please , comrades . xxmaj one - two ! xxmaj one - two ! … ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston loathed this exercise , which sent shooting pains all the way from 
▁ his heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing fit . 
▁ xxmaj the half - pleasant quality went out of his meditations . xxmaj the past , he reflected , 
▁ had not merely been altered , it had been actually destroyed . xxmaj for how could 
▁ you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no record outside 
▁ your own memory ? xxmaj he tried to remember in what year he had first heard 
▁ mention of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj he thought it must have been at some time in the 
▁ sixties , but it was impossible to be certain . xxmaj in the xxmaj party histories , of course , 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother figured as the leader and guardian of the xxmaj revolution since its very 
▁ earliest days . xxmaj his exploits had been gradually pushed backwards in time until 
▁ 19 
▁ already they extended into the fabulous world of the forties and the thirties , 
▁ when the capitalists in their strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets 
▁ of xxmaj london in great gleaming motor - cars or horse carriages with glass sides . 
▁ xxmaj there was no knowing how much of this legend was true and how much invented . 
▁ xxmaj winston could not even remember at what date the xxmaj party itself had come into 
▁ existence . xxmaj he did not believe he had ever heard the word xxmaj ingsoc before 1960 , 
▁ but it was possible that in its xxmaj oldspeak form-’english xxmaj socialism ’ , that is to say 
▁ — it had been current earlier . xxmaj everything melted into mist . xxmaj sometimes , indeed , 
▁ you could put your finger on a definite lie . xxmaj it was not true , for example , as was 
▁ claimed in the xxmaj party history books , that the xxmaj party had invented aeroplanes . 
▁ xxmaj he remembered aeroplanes since his earliest childhood . xxmaj but you could prove 
▁ nothing . xxmaj there was never any evidence . xxmaj just once in his whole life he had held 
▁ in his hands unmistakable documentary proof of the falsification of an historical 
▁ fact . xxmaj and on that occasion 
▁ ’ smith ! ’ screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen . ’ 6079 xxmaj smith xxup w. ! 
▁ xxmaj yes , you ! xxmaj bend lower , please ! xxmaj you can do better than that . xxmaj you ’re not trying . 
▁ xxmaj lower , please ! xxmaj that ’s better , comrade . xxmaj now stand at ease , the whole squad , 
▁ and watch me . ’ 
▁ a sudden hot sweat had broken out all over xxmaj winston ’s body . xxmaj his face remained completely inscrutable . xxmaj never show dismay ! xxmaj never show resentment ! 
▁ a single flicker of the eyes could give you away . xxmaj he stood watching while the 
▁ instructress raised her arms above her head and — one could not say gracefully , 
▁ but with remarkable neatness and efficiency — bent over and tucked the first 
▁ joint of her fingers under her toes . 
▁ ’ there , comrades ! xxmaj that ’s how i want to see you doing it . xxmaj watch me again . 
▁ xxmaj i ’ m thirty - nine and xxmaj i ’ ve had four children . xxmaj now look . ’ xxmaj she bent over again . 
▁ ’ you see my knees are n’t bent . xxmaj you can all do it if you want to , ’ she added 
▁ as she straightened herself up . ’ anyone under forty - five is perfectly capable of 
▁ touching his toes . xxmaj we do n’t all have the privilege of fighting in the front line , 
▁ but at least we can all keep fit . xxmaj remember our boys on the xxmaj malabar front ! xxmaj and 
▁ the sailors in the xxmaj floating xxmaj fortresses ! xxmaj just think what they have to put up 
▁ with . xxmaj now try again . xxmaj that ’s better , comrade , that ’s much better , ’ she added 
▁ encouragingly as xxmaj winston , with a violent lunge , succeeded in touching his toes 
▁ with knees unbent , for the first time in several years . 
▁ 20 
▁ xxmaj chapter 4 
▁ xxmaj with the deep , unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the telescreen 
▁ could prevent him from uttering when his day ’s work started , xxmaj winston pulled 
▁ the speakwrite towards him , blew the dust from its mouthpiece , and put on his 
▁ spectacles . xxmaj then he unrolled and clipped together four small cylinders of paper 
▁ which had already flopped out of the pneumatic tube on the right - hand side of 
▁ his desk . 
▁ xxmaj in the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices . xxmaj to the right of the 
▁ speakwrite , a small pneumatic tube for written messages , to the left , a larger 
▁ one for newspapers ; and in the side wall , within easy reach of xxmaj winston ’s arm , a 
▁ large oblong slit protected by a wire grating . xxmaj this last was for the disposal of 
▁ waste paper . xxmaj similar slits existed in thousands or tens of thousands throughout 
▁ the building , not only in every room but at short intervals in every corridor . 
▁ xxmaj for some reason they were nicknamed memory holes . xxmaj when one knew that any 
▁ document was due for destruction , or even when one saw a scrap of waste paper 
▁ lying about , it was an automatic action to lift the flap of the nearest memory 
▁ hole and drop it in , whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm 
▁ air to the enormous furnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of 
▁ the building . 
▁ xxmaj winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled . xxmaj each 
▁ contained a message of only one or two lines , in the abbreviated jargon — not 
▁ actually xxmaj newspeak , but consisting largely of xxmaj newspeak words — which was used 
▁ in the xxmaj ministry for internal purposes . xxmaj they ran : 
▁ times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify 
▁ times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue 
▁ times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify 
▁ times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite 
▁ fullwise upsub antefiling 
▁ xxmaj with a faint feeling of satisfaction xxmaj winston laid the fourth message aside . 
▁ xxmaj it was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last . xxmaj the 
▁ other three were routine matters , though the second one would probably mean 
▁ some tedious wading through lists of figures . 
▁ xxmaj winston dialled ’ back numbers ’ on the telescreen and called for the appropriate issues of xxmaj the xxmaj times , which slid out of the pneumatic tube after only a 
▁ few minutes ’ delay . xxmaj the messages he had received referred to articles or news 
▁ items which for one reason or another it was thought necessary to alter , or , as 
▁ the official phrase had it , to rectify . xxmaj for example , it appeared from xxmaj the xxmaj times 
▁ of the seventeenth of xxmaj march that xxmaj big xxmaj brother , in his speech of the previous 
▁ 21 
▁ day , had predicted that the xxmaj south xxmaj indian front would remain quiet but that a 
▁ xxmaj eurasian offensive would shortly be launched in xxmaj north xxmaj africa . xxmaj as it happened , 
▁ the xxmaj eurasian xxmaj higher xxmaj command had launched its offensive in xxmaj south xxmaj india and 
▁ left xxmaj north xxmaj africa alone . xxmaj it was therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s speech , in such a way as to make him predict the thing that had 
▁ actually happened . xxmaj or again , xxmaj the xxmaj times of the nineteenth of xxmaj december had 
▁ published the official forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption 
▁ goods in the fourth quarter of 1983 , which was also the sixth quarter of the 
▁ xxmaj ninth three - year xxmaj plan . xxmaj today ’s issue contained a statement of the actual output , from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly 
▁ wrong . xxmaj winston ’s job was to rectify the original figures by making them agree 
▁ with the later ones . xxmaj as for the third message , it referred to a very simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes . xxmaj as short a time ago as 
▁ xxmaj february , the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty had issued a promise ( a ’ categorical pledge ’ 
▁ were the official words ) that there would be no reduction of the chocolate ration 
▁ during 1984 . xxmaj actually , as xxmaj winston was aware , the chocolate ration was to be 
▁ reduced from thirty grammes to twenty at the end of the present week . xxmaj all that 
▁ was needed was to substitute for the original promise a warning that it would 
▁ probably be necessary to reduce the ration at some time in xxmaj april . 
▁ xxmaj as soon as xxmaj winston had dealt with each of the messages , he clipped his 
▁ speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of xxmaj the xxmaj times and pushed 
▁ them into the pneumatic tube . xxmaj then , with a movement which was as nearly as 
▁ possible unconscious , he crumpled up the original message and any notes that 
▁ he himself had made , and dropped them into the memory hole to be devoured 
▁ by the flames . 
▁ xxmaj what happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led , 
▁ he did not know in detail , but he did know in general terms . xxmaj as soon as all the 
▁ corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number of xxmaj the 
▁ xxmaj times had been assembled and collated , that number would be reprinted , the 
▁ original copy destroyed , and the corrected copy placed on the files in its stead . 
▁ xxmaj this process of continuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers , but 
▁ to books , periodicals , pamphlets , posters , leaflets , films , sound - tracks , cartoons , 
▁ photographs — to every kind of literature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or ideological significance . xxmaj day by day and almost 
▁ minute by minute the past was brought up to date . xxmaj in this way every prediction 
▁ made by the xxmaj party could be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct , nor was any item of news , or any expression of opinion , which conflicted 
▁ with the needs of the moment , ever allowed to remain on record . xxmaj all history was 
▁ a palimpsest , scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was necessary . xxmaj in 
▁ no case would it have been possible , once the deed was done , to prove that any 
▁ falsification had taken place . xxmaj the largest section of the xxmaj records xxmaj department , 
▁ far larger than the one on which xxmaj winston worked , consisted simply of persons 
▁ whose duty it was to track down and collect all copies of books , newspapers , 
▁ and other documents which had been superseded and were due for destruction . 
▁ a number of xxmaj the xxmaj times which might , because of changes in political alignment , 
▁ or mistaken prophecies uttered by xxmaj big xxmaj brother , have been rewritten a dozen 
▁ times still stood on the files bearing its original date , and no other copy existed 
▁ to contradict it . xxmaj books , also , were recalled and rewritten again and again , and 
▁ were invariably reissued without any admission that any alteration had been 
▁ made . xxmaj even the written instructions which xxmaj winston received , and which he 
▁ 22 
▁ invariably got rid of as soon as he had dealt with them , never stated or implied 
▁ that an act of forgery was to be committed : always the reference was to slips , 
▁ errors , misprints , or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in the 
▁ interests of accuracy . 
▁ xxmaj but actually , he thought as he re - adjusted the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty ’s figures , 
▁ it was not even forgery . xxmaj it was merely the substitution of one piece of nonsense 
▁ for another . xxmaj most of the material that you were dealing with had no connexion 
▁ with anything in the real world , not even the kind of connexion that is contained 
▁ in a direct lie . xxmaj statistics were just as much a fantasy in their original version 
▁ as in their rectified version . a great deal of the time you were expected to 
▁ make them up out of your head . xxmaj for example , the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty ’s forecast 
▁ had estimated the output of boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs . xxmaj the 
▁ actual output was given as sixty - two millions . xxmaj winston , however , in rewriting 
▁ the forecast , marked the figure down to fifty - seven millions , so as to allow for 
▁ the usual claim that the quota had been overfulfilled . xxmaj in any case , sixty - two 
▁ millions was no nearer the truth than fifty - seven millions , or than 145 millions . 
▁ xxmaj very likely no boots had been produced at all . xxmaj likelier still , nobody knew 
▁ how many had been produced , much less cared . xxmaj all one knew was that every 
▁ quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper , while perhaps 
▁ half the population of xxmaj oceania went barefoot . xxmaj and so it was with every class 
▁ of recorded fact , great or small . xxmaj everything faded away into a shadow - world in 
▁ which , finally , even the date of the year had become uncertain . 
▁ xxmaj winston glanced across the hall . xxmaj in the corresponding cubicle on the other 
▁ side a small , precise - looking , dark - chinned man named xxmaj tillotson was working 
▁ steadily away , with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very close 
▁ to the mouthpiece of the speakwrite . xxmaj he had the air of trying to keep what he 
▁ was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen . xxmaj he looked up , and his 
▁ spectacles darted a hostile flash in xxmaj winston ’s direction . 
▁ xxmaj winston hardly knew xxmaj tillotson , and had no idea what work he was employed 
▁ on . xxmaj people in the xxmaj records xxmaj department did not readily talk about their jobs . 
▁ xxmaj in the long , windowless hall , with its double row of cubicles and its endless 
▁ rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites , there were 
▁ quite a dozen people whom xxmaj winston did not even know by name , though he 
▁ daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors or gesticulating in the 
▁ xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate . xxmaj he knew that in the cubicle next to him the little woman 
▁ with sandy hair toiled day in day out , simply at tracking down and deleting 
▁ from the xxmaj press the names of people who had been vaporized and were therefore 
▁ considered never to have existed . xxmaj there was a certain fitness in this , since 
▁ her own husband had been vaporized a couple of years earlier . xxmaj and a few 
▁ cubicles away a mild , ineffectual , dreamy creature named xxmaj ampleforth , with 
▁ very hairy ears and a surprising talent for juggling with rhymes and metres , 
▁ was engaged in producing garbled versions — definitive texts , they were called 
▁ — of poems which had become ideologically offensive , but which for one reason 
▁ or another were to be retained in the anthologies . xxmaj and this hall , with its fifty 
▁ workers or thereabouts , was only one sub - section , a single cell , as it were , in 
▁ the huge complexity of the xxmaj records xxmaj department . xxmaj beyond , above , below , were 
▁ other swarms of workers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs . xxmaj there 
▁ were the huge printing - shops with their sub - editors , their typography experts , 
▁ and their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs . xxmaj there was 
▁ the tele - programmes section with its engineers , its producers , and its teams of 
▁ 23 
▁ actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices . xxmaj there were the armies 
▁ of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists of books and periodicals 
▁ which were due for recall . xxmaj there were the vast repositories where the corrected 
▁ documents were stored , and the hidden furnaces where the original copies were 
▁ destroyed . xxmaj and somewhere or other , quite anonymous , there were the directing 
▁ brains who co - ordinated the whole effort and laid down the lines of policy which 
▁ made it necessary that this fragment of the past should be preserved , that one 
▁ falsified , and the other rubbed out of existence . 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj records xxmaj department , after all , was itself only a single branch of 
▁ the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth , whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past but 
▁ to supply the citizens of xxmaj oceania with newspapers , films , textbooks , telescreen 
▁ programmes , plays , novels — with every conceivable kind of information , instruction , or entertainment , from a statue to a slogan , from a lyric poem to a 
▁ biological treatise , and from a child ’s spelling - book to a xxmaj newspeak dictionary . 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj ministry had not only to supply the multifarious needs of the party , 
▁ but also to repeat the whole operation at a lower level for the benefit of the 
▁ proletariat . xxmaj there was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian literature , music , drama , and entertainment generally . xxmaj here were produced rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport , crime and 
▁ astrology , sensational five - cent novelettes , films oozing with sex , and sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a special kind 
▁ of kaleidoscope known as a versificator . xxmaj there was even a whole sub - section — 
▁ xxmaj pornosec , it was called in xxmaj newspeak — engaged in producing the lowest kind of 
▁ pornography , which was sent out in sealed packets and which no xxmaj party member , 
▁ other than those who worked on it , was permitted to look at . 
▁ xxmaj three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while xxmaj winston was working , but they were simple matters , and he had disposed of them before the xxmaj two 
▁ xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate interrupted him . xxmaj when the xxmaj hate was over he returned to his cubicle , took the xxmaj newspeak dictionary from the shelf , pushed the speakwrite to one 
▁ side , cleaned his spectacles , and settled down to his main job of the morning . 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s greatest pleasure in life was in his work . xxmaj most of it was a tedious 
▁ routine , but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and intricate that 
▁ you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of a mathematical problem 
▁ — delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing to guide you except 
▁ your knowledge of the principles of xxmaj ingsoc and your estimate of what the xxmaj party 
▁ wanted you to say . xxmaj winston was good at this kind of thing . xxmaj on occasion he had 
▁ even been entrusted with the rectification of xxmaj the xxmaj times leading articles , which 
▁ were written entirely in xxmaj newspeak . xxmaj he unrolled the message that he had set 
▁ aside earlier . xxmaj it ran : 
▁ times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite 
▁ fullwise upsub antefiling 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj oldspeak ( or standard xxmaj english ) this might be rendered : xxmaj the reporting of 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s xxmaj order for the xxmaj day in xxmaj the xxmaj times of xxmaj december 3rd 1983 is extremely 
▁ unsatisfactory and makes references to non - existent persons . xxmaj rewrite it in full 
▁ and submit your draft to higher authority before filing . 
▁ xxmaj winston read through the offending article . xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s xxmaj order for the xxmaj day , 
▁ it seemed , had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an organization 
▁ known as xxup ffcc , which supplied cigarettes and other comforts to the sailors 
▁ in the xxmaj floating xxmaj fortresses . a certain xxmaj comrade xxmaj withers , a prominent member 
▁ of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , had been singled out for special mention and awarded a 
▁ 24 
▁ decoration , the xxmaj order of xxmaj conspicuous xxmaj merit , xxmaj second xxmaj class . 
▁ xxmaj three months later xxup ffcc had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons 
▁ given . xxmaj one could assume that xxmaj withers and his associates were now in disgrace , 
▁ but there had been no report of the matter in the xxmaj press or on the telescreen . 
▁ xxmaj that was to be expected , since it was unusual for political offenders to be put 
▁ on trial or even publicly denounced . xxmaj the great purges involving thousands of 
▁ people , with public trials of traitors and thought - criminals who made abject 
▁ confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed , were special showpieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of years . xxmaj more commonly , 
▁ people who had incurred the displeasure of the xxmaj party simply disappeared and 
▁ were never heard of again . xxmaj one never had the smallest clue as to what had 
▁ happened to them . xxmaj in some cases they might not even be dead . xxmaj perhaps thirty 
▁ people personally known to xxmaj winston , not counting his parents , had disappeared 
▁ at one time or another . 
▁ xxmaj winston stroked his nose gently with a paper - clip . xxmaj in the cubicle across 
▁ the way xxmaj comrade xxmaj tillotson was still crouching secretively over his speakwrite . 
▁ xxmaj he raised his head for a moment : again the hostile spectacle - flash . xxmaj winston 
▁ wondered whether xxmaj comrade xxmaj tillotson was engaged on the same job as himself . 
▁ xxmaj it was perfectly possible . xxmaj so tricky a piece of work would never be entrusted 
▁ to a single person : on the other hand , to turn it over to a committee would 
▁ be to admit openly that an act of fabrication was taking place . xxmaj very likely as 
▁ many as a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother had actually said . xxmaj and presently some master brain in the xxmaj inner xxmaj party 
▁ would select this version or that , would re - edit it and set in motion the complex 
▁ processes of cross - referencing that would be required , and then the chosen lie 
▁ would pass into the permanent records and become truth . 
▁ xxmaj winston did not know why xxmaj withers had been disgraced . xxmaj perhaps it was for 
▁ corruption or incompetence . xxmaj perhaps xxmaj big xxmaj brother was merely getting rid of a 
▁ too - popular subordinate . xxmaj perhaps xxmaj withers or someone close to him had been 
▁ suspected of heretical tendencies . xxmaj or perhaps — what was likeliest of all — the 
▁ thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a necessary 
▁ part of the mechanics of government . xxmaj the only real clue lay in the words ’ refs 
▁ unpersons ’ , which indicated that xxmaj withers was already dead . xxmaj you could not 
▁ invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested . xxmaj sometimes 
▁ they were released and allowed to remain at liberty for as much as a year or 
▁ two years before being executed . xxmaj very occasionally some person whom you had 
▁ believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public trial 
▁ where he would implicate hundreds of others by his testimony before vanishing , 
▁ this time for ever . xxmaj withers , however , was already an unperson . xxmaj he did not exist : 
▁ he had never existed . xxmaj winston decided that it would not be enough simply to 
▁ reverse the tendency of xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s speech . xxmaj it was better to make it deal with 
▁ something totally unconnected with its original subject . 
▁ xxmaj he might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and thoughtcriminals , but that was a little too obvious , while to invent a victory at the front , 
▁ or some triumph of over - production in the xxmaj ninth three - year xxmaj plan , might complicate the records too much . xxmaj what was needed was a piece of pure fantasy . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly there sprang into his mind , ready made as it were , the image of a certain xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy , who had recently died in battle , in heroic circumstances . 
▁ xxmaj there were occasions when xxmaj big xxmaj brother devoted his xxmaj order for the xxmaj day to commemorating some humble , rank - and - file xxmaj party member whose life and death he 
▁ 25 
▁ held up as an example worthy to be followed . xxmaj today he should commemorate 
▁ xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy . xxmaj it was true that there was no such person as xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy , 
▁ but a few lines of print and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him 
▁ into existence . 
▁ xxmaj winston thought for a moment , then pulled the speakwrite towards him 
▁ and began dictating in xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s familiar style : a style at once military 
▁ and pedantic , and , because of a trick of asking questions and then promptly 
▁ answering them ( ’ what lessons do we learn from this fact , comrades ? xxmaj the 
▁ lesson — which is also one of the fundamental principles of xxmaj ingsoc — that , ’ etc . , 
▁ etc . ) , easy to imitate . 
▁ xxmaj at the age of three xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum , a 
▁ sub - machine gun , and a model helicopter . xxmaj at six — a year early , by a special 
▁ relaxation of the rules — he had joined the xxmaj spies , at nine he had been a troop 
▁ leader . xxmaj at eleven he had denounced his uncle to the xxmaj thought xxmaj police after 
▁ overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal tendencies . 
▁ xxmaj at seventeen he had been a district organizer of the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league . 
▁ xxmaj at nine teen he had designed a hand - grenade which had been adopted by the 
▁ xxmaj ministry of xxmaj peace and which , at its first trial , had killed thirty - one xxmaj eurasian 
▁ prisoners in one burst . xxmaj at twenty - three he had perished in action . xxmaj pursued by 
▁ enemy jet planes while flying over the xxmaj indian xxmaj ocean with important despatches , 
▁ he had weighted his body with his machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter 
▁ into deep water , despatches and all — an end , said xxmaj big xxmaj brother , which it was 
▁ impossible to contemplate without feelings of envy . xxmaj big xxmaj brother added a few 
▁ remarks on the purity and single - mindedness of xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy ’s life . xxmaj he was 
▁ a total abstainer and a nonsmoker , had no recreations except a daily hour in 
▁ the gymnasium , and had taken a vow of celibacy , believing marriage and the 
▁ care of a family to be incompatible with a twenty - four - hour - a - day devotion to 
▁ duty . xxmaj he had no subjects of conversation except the principles of xxmaj ingsoc , and 
▁ no aim in life except the defeat of the xxmaj eurasian enemy and the hunting - down of 
▁ spies , saboteurs , thoughtcriminals , and traitors generally . 
▁ xxmaj winston debated with himself whether to award xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy the xxmaj order 
▁ of xxmaj conspicuous xxmaj merit : in the end he decided against it because of the unnecessary cross - referencing that it would entail . 
▁ xxmaj once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle . xxmaj something seemed 
▁ to tell him with certainty that xxmaj tillotson was busy on the same job as himself . 
▁ xxmaj there was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted , but he felt a 
▁ profound conviction that it would be his own . xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy , unimagined an 
▁ hour ago , was now a fact . xxmaj it struck him as curious that you could create dead 
▁ men but not living ones . xxmaj comrade xxmaj ogilvy , who had never existed in the present , 
▁ now existed in the past , and when once the act of forgery was forgotten , he 
▁ would exist just as authentically , and upon the same evidence , as xxmaj charlemagne 
▁ or xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar . 
▁ 26 
▁ xxmaj chapter 5 
▁ xxmaj in the low - ceilinged canteen , deep underground , the lunch queue jerked slowly 
▁ forward . xxmaj the room was already very full and deafeningly noisy . xxmaj from the grille 
▁ at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth , with a sour metallic smell 
▁ which did not quite overcome the fumes of xxmaj victory xxmaj gin . xxmaj on the far side of the 
▁ room there was a small bar , a mere hole in the wall , where gin could be bought 
▁ at ten cents the large nip . 
▁ ’ just the man i was looking for , ’ said a voice at xxmaj winston ’s back . 
▁ xxmaj he turned round . xxmaj it was his friend xxmaj syme , who worked in the xxmaj research 
▁ xxmaj department . xxmaj perhaps ’ friend ’ was not exactly the right word . xxmaj you did not have 
▁ friends nowadays , you had comrades : but there were some comrades whose 
▁ society was pleasanter than that of others . xxmaj syme was a philologist , a specialist 
▁ in xxmaj newspeak . xxmaj indeed , he was one of the enormous team of experts now engaged 
▁ in compiling the xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition of the xxmaj newspeak xxmaj dictionary . xxmaj he was a tiny 
▁ creature , smaller than xxmaj winston , with dark hair and large , protuberant eyes , at 
▁ once mournful and derisive , which seemed to search your face closely while he 
▁ was speaking to you . 
▁ ’ i wanted to ask you whether you ’d got any razor blades , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ not one ! ’ said xxmaj winston with a sort of guilty haste . ’ i ’ ve tried all over the 
▁ place . xxmaj they do n’t exist any longer . ’ 
▁ xxmaj everyone kept asking you for razor blades . xxmaj actually he had two unused ones 
▁ which he was hoarding up . xxmaj there had been a famine of them for months past . 
▁ xxmaj at any given moment there was some necessary article which the xxmaj party shops 
▁ were unable to supply . xxmaj sometimes it was buttons , sometimes it was darning 
▁ wool , sometimes it was shoelaces ; at present it was razor blades . xxmaj you could 
▁ only get hold of them , if at all , by scrounging more or less furtively on the ’ free ’ 
▁ market . 
▁ ’ i ’ ve been using the same blade for six weeks , ’ he added untruthfully . 
▁ xxmaj the queue gave another jerk forward . xxmaj as they halted he turned and faced 
▁ xxmaj syme again . xxmaj each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the end of 
▁ the counter . 
▁ ’ did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday ? ’ said xxmaj syme . 
▁ ’ i was working , ’ said xxmaj winston indifferently . ’ i shall see it on the flicks , i 
▁ suppose . ’ 
▁ ’ a very inadequate substitute , ’ said xxmaj syme . 
▁ xxmaj his mocking eyes roved over xxmaj winston ’s face . ’ i know you , ’ the eyes seemed 
▁ to say , ’ i see through you . i know very well why you did n’t go to see those 
▁ prisoners hanged . ’ xxmaj in an intellectual way , xxmaj syme was venomously orthodox . xxmaj he 
▁ 27 
▁ would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction of helicopter raids on enemy 
▁ villages , and trials and confessions of thought - criminals , the executions in the 
▁ cellars of the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love . xxmaj talking to him was largely a matter of getting 
▁ him away from such subjects and entangling him , if possible , in the technicalities 
▁ of xxmaj newspeak , on which he was authoritative and interesting . xxmaj winston turned 
▁ his head a little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes . 
▁ ’ it was a good hanging , ’ said xxmaj syme reminiscently . ’ i think it spoils it when 
▁ they tie their feet together . i like to see them kicking . xxmaj and above all , at the 
▁ end , the tongue sticking right out , and blue a quite bright blue . xxmaj that ’s the 
▁ detail that appeals to me . ’ 
▁ ’ nex ’ , please ! ’ yelled the white - aproned prole with the ladle . 
▁ xxmaj winston and xxmaj syme pushed their trays beneath the grille . xxmaj on to each was 
▁ dumped swiftly the regulation lunch — a metal pannikin of pinkish - grey stew , 
▁ a hunk of bread , a cube of cheese , a mug of milkless xxmaj victory xxmaj coffee , and one 
▁ saccharine tablet . 
▁ ’ there ’s a table over there , under that telescreen , ’ said xxmaj syme . ’ let ’s pick up 
▁ a gin on the way . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs . xxmaj they threaded 
▁ their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the metaltopped table , on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew , a filthy 
▁ liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit . xxmaj winston took up his mug of 
▁ gin , paused for an instant to collect his nerve , and gulped the oily - tasting stuff 
▁ down . xxmaj when he had winked the tears out of his eyes he suddenly discovered that 
▁ he was hungry . xxmaj he began swallowing spoonfuls of the stew , which , in among 
▁ its general sloppiness , had cubes of spongy pinkish stuff which was probably a 
▁ preparation of meat . xxmaj neither of them spoke again till they had emptied their 
▁ pannikins . xxmaj from the table at xxmaj winston ’s left , a little behind his back , someone 
▁ was talking rapidly and continuously , a harsh gabble almost like the quacking 
▁ of a duck , which pierced the general uproar of the room . 
▁ ’ how is the xxmaj dictionary getting on ? ’ said xxmaj winston , raising his voice to overcome the noise . 
▁ ’ slowly , ’ said xxmaj syme . ’ i ’ m on the adjectives . xxmaj it ’s fascinating . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he had brightened up immediately at the mention of xxmaj newspeak . xxmaj he pushed 
▁ his pannikin aside , took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his cheese 
▁ in the other , and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak without 
▁ shouting . 
▁ ’ the xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition is the definitive edition , ’ he said . ’ we ’re getting the 
▁ language into its final shape — the shape it ’s going to have when nobody speaks 
▁ anything else . xxmaj when we ’ ve finished with it , people like you will have to learn it 
▁ all over again . xxmaj you think , i dare say , that our chief job is inventing new words . 
▁ xxmaj but not a bit of it ! xxmaj we ’re destroying words — scores of them , hundreds of them , 
▁ every day . xxmaj we ’re cutting the language down to the bone . xxmaj the xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition 
▁ wo n’t contain a single word that will become obsolete before the year 2050 . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls , then 
▁ continued speaking , with a sort of pedant ’s passion . xxmaj his thin dark face had 
▁ become animated , his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown almost 
▁ dreamy . 
▁ ’ it ’s a beautiful thing , the destruction of words . xxmaj of course the great wastage 
▁ is in the verbs and adjectives , but there are hundreds of nouns that can be got 
▁ rid of as well . xxmaj it is n’t only the synonyms ; there are also the antonyms . xxmaj after all , 
▁ 28 
▁ what justification is there for a word which is simply the opposite of some other 
▁ word ? a word contains its opposite in itself . xxmaj take ” good ” , for instance . xxmaj if you 
▁ have a word like ” good ” , what need is there for a word like ” bad ” ? ” ungood ” 
▁ will do just as well — better , because it ’s an exact opposite , which the other 
▁ is not . xxmaj or again , if you want a stronger version of ” good ” , what sense is there 
▁ in having a whole string of vague useless words like ” excellent ” and ” splendid ” 
▁ and all the rest of them ? ” plusgood ” covers the meaning , or ” doubleplusgood ” 
▁ if you want something stronger still . xxmaj of course we use those forms already . but 
▁ in the final version of xxmaj newspeak there ’ll be nothing else . xxmaj in the end the whole 
▁ notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words — in reality , 
▁ only one word . xxmaj do n’t you see the beauty of that , xxmaj winston ? xxmaj it was b.b . ’s idea 
▁ originally , of course , ’ he added as an afterthought . 
▁ a sort of vapid eagerness flitted across xxmaj winston ’s face at the mention of xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother . xxmaj nevertheless xxmaj syme immediately detected a certain lack of enthusiasm . 
▁ ’ you have n’t a real appreciation of xxmaj newspeak , xxmaj winston , ’ he said almost 
▁ sadly . ’ even when you write it you ’re still thinking in xxmaj oldspeak . xxmaj i ’ ve read some 
▁ of those pieces that you write in xxmaj the xxmaj times occasionally . xxmaj they ’re good enough , 
▁ but they ’re translations . xxmaj in your heart you ’d prefer to stick to xxmaj oldspeak , with 
▁ all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning . xxmaj you do n’t grasp the beauty 
▁ of the destruction of words . xxmaj do you know that xxmaj newspeak is the only language 
▁ in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller every year ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston did know that , of course . xxmaj he smiled , sympathetically he hoped , not 
▁ trusting himself to speak . xxmaj syme bit off another fragment of the dark - coloured 
▁ bread , chewed it briefly , and went on : 
▁ ’ do n’t you see that the whole aim of xxmaj newspeak is to narrow the range of 
▁ thought ? xxmaj in the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible , because 
▁ there will be no words in which to express it . xxmaj every concept that can ever 
▁ be needed , will be expressed by exactly one word , with its meaning rigidly 
▁ defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten . xxmaj already , in 
▁ the xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition , we ’re not far from that point . xxmaj but the process will still be 
▁ continuing long after you and i are dead . xxmaj every year fewer and fewer words , and 
▁ the range of consciousness always a little smaller . xxmaj even now , of course , there ’s 
▁ no reason or excuse for committing thoughtcrime . xxmaj it ’s merely a question of 
▁ self - discipline , reality - control . xxmaj but in the end there wo n’t be any need even for 
▁ that . xxmaj the xxmaj revolution will be complete when the language is perfect . xxmaj newspeak 
▁ is xxmaj ingsoc and xxmaj ingsoc is xxmaj newspeak , ’ he added with a sort of mystical satisfaction . 
▁ ’ has it ever occurred to you , xxmaj winston , that by the year 2050 , at the very latest , 
▁ not a single human being will be alive who could understand such a conversation 
▁ as we are having now ? ’ 
▁ ’ except- ’ began xxmaj winston doubtfully , and he stopped . 
▁ xxmaj it had been on the tip of his tongue to say ’ except the proles , ’ but he 
▁ checked himself , not feeling fully certain that this remark was not in some way 
▁ unorthodox . xxmaj syme , however , had divined what he was about to say . 
▁ ’ the proles are not human beings , ’ he said carelessly . ’ xxmaj by 2050 earlier , 
▁ probably — all real knowledge of xxmaj oldspeak will have disappeared . xxmaj the whole 
▁ literature of the past will have been destroyed . xxmaj chaucer , xxmaj shakespeare , xxmaj milton , 
▁ xxmaj byron — they ’ll exist only in xxmaj newspeak versions , not merely changed into something different , but actually changed into something contradictory of what they 
▁ used to be . xxmaj even the literature of the xxmaj party will change . xxmaj even the slogans will 
▁ change . xxmaj how could you have a slogan like ” freedom is slavery ” when the concept 
▁ 29 
▁ of freedom has been abolished ? xxmaj the whole climate of thought will be different . 
▁ xxmaj in fact there will be no thought , as we understand it now . xxmaj orthodoxy means 
▁ not thinking — not needing to think . xxmaj orthodoxy is unconsciousness . ’ 
▁ xxmaj one of these days , thought xxmaj winston with sudden deep conviction , xxmaj syme will 
▁ be vaporized . xxmaj he is too intelligent . xxmaj he sees too clearly and speaks too plainly . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj party does not like such people . xxmaj one day he will disappear . xxmaj it is written 
▁ in his face . 
▁ xxmaj winston had finished his bread and cheese . xxmaj he turned a little sideways in 
▁ his chair to drink his mug of coffee . xxmaj at the table on his left the man with 
▁ the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away . a young woman who 
▁ was perhaps his secretary , and who was sitting with her back to xxmaj winston , was 
▁ listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with everything that he said . 
▁ xxmaj from time to time xxmaj winston caught some such remark as ’ i think you ’re so right , 
▁ i do so agree with you ’ , uttered in a youthful and rather silly feminine voice . xxmaj but 
▁ the other voice never stopped for an instant , even when the girl was speaking . 
▁ xxmaj winston knew the man by sight , though he knew no more about him than 
▁ that he held some important post in the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department . xxmaj he was a man 
▁ of about thirty , with a muscular throat and a large , mobile mouth . xxmaj his head 
▁ was thrown back a little , and because of the angle at which he was sitting , his 
▁ spectacles caught the light and presented to xxmaj winston two blank discs instead of 
▁ eyes . xxmaj what was slightly horrible , was that from the stream of sound that poured 
▁ out of his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word . xxmaj just 
▁ once xxmaj winston caught a phrase-’complete and final elimination of xxmaj goldsteinism’- 
▁ jerked out very rapidly and , as it seemed , all in one piece , like a line of type 
▁ cast solid . xxmaj for the rest it was just a noise , a quack - quack - quacking . xxmaj and yet , 
▁ though you could not actually hear what the man was saying , you could not 
▁ be in any doubt about its general nature . xxmaj he might be denouncing xxmaj goldstein 
▁ and demanding sterner measures against thought - criminals and saboteurs , he 
▁ might be fulminating against the atrocities of the xxmaj eurasian army , he might be 
▁ praising xxmaj big xxmaj brother or the heroes on the xxmaj malabar front - it made no difference . 
▁ xxmaj whatever it was , you could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy , 
▁ pure xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj as he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up 
▁ and down , xxmaj winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being 
▁ but some kind of dummy . xxmaj it was not the man ’s brain that was speaking , it was 
▁ his larynx . xxmaj the stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words , but it was 
▁ not speech in the true sense : it was a noise uttered in unconsciousness , like the 
▁ quacking of a duck . 
▁ xxmaj syme had fallen silent for a moment , and with the handle of his spoon was 
▁ tracing patterns in the puddle of stew . xxmaj the voice from the other table quacked 
▁ rapidly on , easily audible in spite of the surrounding din . 
▁ ’ there is a word in xxmaj newspeak , ’ said xxmaj syme , ’ i do n’t know whether you know 
▁ it : duckspeak , to quack like a duck . xxmaj it is one of those interesting words that 
▁ have two contradictory meanings . xxmaj applied to an opponent , it is abuse , applied 
▁ to someone you agree with , it is praise . ’ 
▁ xxmaj unquestionably xxmaj syme will be vaporized , xxmaj winston thought again . xxmaj he thought 
▁ it with a kind of sadness , although well knowing that xxmaj syme despised him and 
▁ slightly disliked him , and was fully capable of denouncing him as a thoughtcriminal if he saw any reason for doing so . xxmaj there was something subtly wrong 
▁ with xxmaj syme . xxmaj there was something that he lacked : discretion , aloofness , a sort 
▁ of saving stupidity . xxmaj you could not say that he was unorthodox . xxmaj he believed in 
▁ 30 
▁ the principles of xxmaj ingsoc , he venerated xxmaj big xxmaj brother , he rejoiced over victories , 
▁ he hated heretics , not merely with sincerity but with a sort of restless zeal , 
▁ an up - to - dateness of information , which the ordinary xxmaj party member did not 
▁ approach . xxmaj yet a faint air of disreputability always clung to him . xxmaj he said things 
▁ that would have been better unsaid , he had read too many books , he frequented 
▁ the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree xxmaj caf´e , haunt of painters and musicians . xxmaj there was no law , 
▁ not even an unwritten law , against frequenting the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree xxmaj caf´e , yet the 
▁ place was somehow ill - omened . xxmaj the old , discredited leaders of the xxmaj party had 
▁ been used to gather there before they were finally purged . xxmaj goldstein himself , it 
▁ was said , had sometimes been seen there , years and decades ago . xxmaj syme ’s fate 
▁ was not difficult to foresee . xxmaj and yet it was a fact that if xxmaj syme grasped , even for 
▁ three seconds , the nature of his , xxmaj winston ’s , secret opinions , he would betray him 
▁ instantly to the xxmaj thought police . xxmaj so would anybody else , for that matter : but 
▁ xxmaj syme more than most . xxmaj zeal was not enough . xxmaj orthodoxy was unconsciousness . 
▁ xxmaj syme looked up . ’ here comes xxmaj parsons , ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj something in the tone of his voice seemed to add , ’ that bloody fool ’ . xxmaj parsons , 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s fellow - tenant at xxmaj victory xxmaj mansions , was in fact threading his way 
▁ across the room — a tubby , middle - sized man with fair hair and a froglike face . 
▁ xxmaj at thirty - five he was already putting on rolls of fat at neck and waistline , but his 
▁ movements were brisk and boyish . xxmaj his whole appearance was that of a little boy 
▁ grown large , so much so that although he was wearing the regulation overalls , it 
▁ was almost impossible not to think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts , 
▁ grey shirt , and red neckerchief of the xxmaj spies . xxmaj in visualizing him one saw always a 
▁ picture of dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms . xxmaj parsons 
▁ did , indeed , invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any other 
▁ physical activity gave him an excuse for doing so . xxmaj he greeted them both with a 
▁ cheery ’ hullo , hullo ! ’ and sat down at the table , giving off an intense smell of 
▁ sweat . xxmaj beads of moisture stood out all over his pink face . xxmaj his powers of sweating 
▁ were extraordinary . xxmaj at the xxmaj community xxmaj centre you could always tell when he 
▁ had been playing table - tennis by the dampness of the bat handle . xxmaj syme had 
▁ produced a strip of paper on which there was a long column of words , and was 
▁ studying it with an ink - pencil between his fingers . 
▁ ’ look at him working away in the lunch hour , ’ said xxmaj parsons , nudging xxmaj winston . ’ keenness , eh ? xxmaj what ’s that you ’ ve got there , old boy ? xxmaj something a bit 
▁ too brainy for me , i expect . xxmaj smith , old boy , xxmaj i ’ll tell you why xxmaj i ’ m chasing you . 
▁ xxmaj it ’s that sub you forgot to give me . ’ 
▁ ’ which sub is that ? said xxmaj winston , automatically feeling for money . xxmaj about a 
▁ quarter of one ’s salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions , which 
▁ were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of them . 
▁ ’ for xxmaj hate xxmaj week . xxmaj you know — the house - by - house fund . xxmaj i ’ m treasurer for 
▁ our block . xxmaj we ’re making an all - out effort — going to put on a tremendous show . 
▁ i tell you , it wo n’t be my fault if old xxmaj victory xxmaj mansions does n’t have the biggest 
▁ outfit of flags in the whole street . xxmaj two dollars you promised me . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes , which xxmaj parsons 
▁ entered in a small notebook , in the neat handwriting of the illiterate . 
▁ ’ by the way , old boy , ’ he said . ’ i hear that little beggar of mine let fly at 
▁ you with his catapult yesterday . i gave him a good dressing - down for it . xxmaj in fact 
▁ i told him xxmaj i ’d take the catapult away if he does it again . 
▁ ’ i think he was a little upset at not going to the execution , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ xxmaj ah , well — what i mean to say , shows the right spirit , does n’t it ? xxmaj mis31 
▁ chievous little beggars they are , both of them , but talk about keenness ! xxmaj all they 
▁ think about is the xxmaj spies , and the war , of course . xxmaj d’you know what that little 
▁ girl of mine did last xxmaj saturday , when her troop was on a hike out xxmaj berkhamsted 
▁ way ? xxmaj she got two other girls to go with her , slipped off from the hike , and 
▁ spent the whole afternoon following a strange man . xxmaj they kept on his tail for 
▁ two hours , right through the woods , and then , when they got into xxmaj amersham , 
▁ handed him over to the patrols . ’ 
▁ ’ what did they do that for ? ’ said xxmaj winston , somewhat taken aback . xxmaj parsons 
▁ went on triumphantly : 
▁ ’ my kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent — might have been 
▁ dropped by parachute , for instance . xxmaj but here ’s the point , old boy . xxmaj what do you 
▁ think put her on to him in the first place ? xxmaj she spotted he was wearing a funny 
▁ kind of shoes — said she ’d never seen anyone wearing shoes like that before . xxmaj so 
▁ the chances were he was a foreigner . xxmaj pretty smart for a nipper of seven , eh ? ’ 
▁ ’ what happened to the man ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ ah , that i could n’t say , of course . xxmaj but i would n’t be altogether surprised 
▁ if- ’ xxmaj parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle , and clicked his tongue for the 
▁ explosion . 
▁ ’ good , ’ said xxmaj syme abstractedly , without looking up from his strip of paper . 
▁ ’ of course we ca n’t afford to take chances , ’ agreed xxmaj winston dutifully . 
▁ ’ what i mean to say , there is a war on , ’ said xxmaj parsons . 
▁ xxmaj as though in confirmation of this , a trumpet call floated from the telescreen 
▁ just above their heads . xxmaj however , it was not the proclamation of a military 
▁ victory this time , but merely an announcement from the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty . 
▁ ’ comrades ! ’ cried an eager youthful voice . ’ attention , comrades ! xxmaj we have 
▁ glorious news for you . xxmaj we have won the battle for production ! xxmaj returns now 
▁ completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the 
▁ standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past year . xxmaj all 
▁ over xxmaj oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous demonstrations 
▁ when workers marched out of factories and offices and paraded through the 
▁ streets with banners voicing their gratitude to xxmaj big xxmaj brother for the new , happy 
▁ life which his wise leadership has bestowed upon us . xxmaj here are some of the 
▁ completed figures . xxmaj foodstuffs- ’ 
▁ xxmaj the phrase ’ our new , happy life ’ recurred several times . xxmaj it had been a 
▁ favourite of late with the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty . xxmaj parsons , his attention caught by 
▁ the trumpet call , sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity , a sort of edified 
▁ boredom . xxmaj he could not follow the figures , but he was aware that they were in 
▁ some way a cause for satisfaction . xxmaj he had lugged out a huge and filthy pipe 
▁ which was already half full of charred tobacco . xxmaj with the tobacco ration at 
▁ 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to fill a pipe to the top . xxmaj winston 
▁ was smoking a xxmaj victory xxmaj cigarette which he held carefully horizontal . xxmaj the new 
▁ ration did not start till tomorrow and he had only four cigarettes left . xxmaj for the 
▁ moment he had shut his ears to the remoter noises and was listening to the 
▁ stuff that streamed out of the telescreen . xxmaj it appeared that there had even been 
▁ demonstrations to thank xxmaj big xxmaj brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty 
▁ grammes a week . xxmaj and only yesterday , he reflected , it had been announced that 
▁ the ration was to be reduced to twenty grammes a week . xxmaj was it possible that 
▁ they could swallow that , after only twenty - four hours ? xxmaj yes , they swallowed it . 
▁ xxmaj parsons swallowed it easily , with the stupidity of an animal . xxmaj the eyeless creature 
▁ at the other table swallowed it fanatically , passionately , with a furious desire 
▁ 32 
▁ to track down , denounce , and vaporize anyone who should suggest that last 
▁ week the ration had been thirty grammes . xxmaj syme , too - in some more complex 
▁ way , involving doublethink , xxmaj syme swallowed it . xxmaj was he , then , alone in the 
▁ possession of a memory ? 
▁ xxmaj the fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen . xxmaj as compared 
▁ with last year there was more food , more clothes , more houses , more furniture , 
▁ more cooking - pots , more fuel , more ships , more helicopters , more books , more 
▁ babies — more of everything except disease , crime , and insanity . xxmaj year by year 
▁ and minute by minute , everybody and everything was whizzing rapidly upwards . 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj syme had done earlier xxmaj winston had taken up his spoon and was dabbling 
▁ in the pale - coloured gravy that dribbled across the table , drawing a long streak 
▁ of it out into a pattern . xxmaj he meditated resentfully on the physical texture of 
▁ life . xxmaj had it always been like this ? xxmaj had food always tasted like this ? xxmaj he looked 
▁ round the canteen . a low - ceilinged , crowded room , its walls grimy from the 
▁ contact of innumerable bodies ; battered metal tables and chairs , placed so close 
▁ together that you sat with elbows touching ; bent spoons , dented trays , coarse 
▁ white mugs ; all surfaces greasy , grime in every crack ; and a sourish , composite 
▁ smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew and dirty clothes . xxmaj always in 
▁ your stomach and in your skin there was a sort of protest , a feeling that you 
▁ had been cheated of something that you had a right to . xxmaj it was true that he had 
▁ no memories of anything greatly different . xxmaj in any time that he could accurately 
▁ remember , there had never been quite enough to eat , one had never had socks 
▁ or underclothes that were not full of holes , furniture had always been battered 
▁ and rickety , rooms underheated , tube trains crowded , houses falling to pieces , 
▁ bread dark - coloured , tea a rarity , coffee filthy - tasting , cigarettes insufficient — 
▁ nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin . xxmaj and though , of course , it grew 
▁ worse as one ’s body aged , was it not a sign that this was not the natural order 
▁ of things , if one ’s heart sickened at the discomfort and dirt and scarcity , the 
▁ interminable winters , the stickiness of one ’s socks , the lifts that never worked , 
▁ the cold water , the gritty soap , the cigarettes that came to pieces , the food with 
▁ its strange evil tastes ? xxmaj why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had 
▁ some kind of ancestral memory that things had once been different ? 
▁ xxmaj he looked round the canteen again . xxmaj nearly everyone was ugly , and would 
▁ still have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform blue overalls . 
▁ xxmaj on the far side of the room , sitting at a table alone , a small , curiously beetle - like 
▁ man was drinking a cup of coffee , his little eyes darting suspicious glances from 
▁ side to side . xxmaj how easy it was , thought xxmaj winston , if you did not look about you , 
▁ to believe that the physical type set up by the xxmaj party as an ideal - tall muscular 
▁ youths and deep - bosomed maidens , blond - haired , vital , sunburnt , carefree — 
▁ existed and even predominated . xxmaj actually , so far as he could judge , the majority 
▁ of people in xxmaj airstrip xxmaj one were small , dark , and ill - favoured . xxmaj it was curious how 
▁ that beetle - like type proliferated in the xxmaj ministries : little dumpy men , growing 
▁ stout very early in life , with short legs , swift scuttling movements , and fat 
▁ inscrutable faces with very small eyes . xxmaj it was the type that seemed to flourish 
▁ best under the dominion of the xxmaj party . 
▁ xxmaj the announcement from the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty ended on another trumpet 
▁ call and gave way to tinny music . xxmaj parsons , stirred to vague enthusiasm by the 
▁ bombardment of figures , took his pipe out of his mouth . 
▁ ’ the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty ’s certainly done a good job this year , ’ he said with 
▁ a knowing shake of his head . ’ by the way , xxmaj smith old boy , i suppose you have n’t 
▁ 33 
▁ got any razor blades you can let me have ? ’ 
▁ ’ not one , ’ said xxmaj winston . ’ i ’ ve been using the same blade for six weeks 
▁ myself . ’ 
▁ ’ ah , well — just thought xxmaj i ’d ask you , old boy . ’ 
▁ ’ sorry , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ xxmaj the quacking voice from the next table , temporarily silenced during the 
▁ xxmaj ministry ’s announcement , had started up again , as loud as ever . xxmaj for some reason 
▁ xxmaj winston suddenly found himself thinking of xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , with her wispy hair 
▁ and the dust in the creases of her face . xxmaj within two years those children would be 
▁ denouncing her to the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons would be vaporized . xxmaj syme 
▁ would be vaporized . xxmaj winston would be vaporized . o’brien would be vaporized . 
▁ xxmaj parsons , on the other hand , would never be vaporized . xxmaj the eyeless creature 
▁ with the quacking voice would never be vaporized . xxmaj the little beetle - like men 
▁ who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine corridors of xxmaj ministries they , too , 
▁ would never be vaporized . xxmaj and the girl with dark hair , the girl from the xxmaj fiction 
▁ xxmaj department — she would never be vaporized either . xxmaj it seemed to him that he 
▁ knew instinctively who would survive and who would perish : though just what 
▁ it was that made for survival , it was not easy to say . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk . xxmaj the 
▁ girl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him . xxmaj it was 
▁ the girl with dark hair . xxmaj she was looking at him in a sidelong way , but with 
▁ curious intensity . xxmaj the instant she caught his eye she looked away again . 
▁ xxmaj the sweat started out on xxmaj winston ’s backbone . a horrible pang of terror 
▁ went through him . xxmaj it was gone almost at once , but it left a sort of nagging 
▁ uneasiness behind . xxmaj why was she watching him ? xxmaj why did she keep following 
▁ him about ? xxmaj unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been 
▁ at the table when he arrived , or had come there afterwards . xxmaj but yesterday , at 
▁ any rate , during the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate , she had sat immediately behind him 
▁ when there was no apparent need to do so . xxmaj quite likely her real object had been 
▁ to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough . 
▁ xxmaj his earlier thought returned to him : probably she was not actually a member 
▁ of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was the 
▁ greatest danger of all . xxmaj he did not know how long she had been looking at him , 
▁ but perhaps for as much as five minutes , and it was possible that his features had 
▁ not been perfectly under control . xxmaj it was terribly dangerous to let your thoughts 
▁ wander when you were in any public place or within range of a telescreen . 
▁ xxmaj the smallest thing could give you away . a nervous tic , an unconscious look of 
▁ anxiety , a habit of muttering to yourself — anything that carried with it the 
▁ suggestion of abnormality , of having something to hide . xxmaj in any case , to wear 
▁ an improper expression on your face ( to look incredulous when a victory was 
▁ announced , for example ) was itself a punishable offence . xxmaj there was even a word 
▁ for it in xxmaj newspeak : facecrime , it was called . 
▁ xxmaj the girl had turned her back on him again . xxmaj perhaps after all she was not 
▁ really following him about , perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat so close 
▁ to him two days running . xxmaj his cigarette had gone out , and he laid it carefully on 
▁ the edge of the table . xxmaj he would finish smoking it after work , if he could keep the 
▁ tobacco in it . xxmaj quite likely the person at the next table was a spy of the xxmaj thought 
▁ xxmaj police , and quite likely he would be in the cellars of the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love within 
▁ three days , but a cigarette end must not be wasted . xxmaj syme had folded up his 
▁ strip of paper and stowed it away in his pocket . xxmaj parsons had begun talking 
▁ 34 
▁ again . 
▁ ’ did i ever tell you , old boy , ’ he said , chuckling round the stem of his pipe , 
▁ ’ about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old marketwoman ’s skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a poster of xxup b.b . ? 
▁ xxmaj sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matches . xxmaj burned her 
▁ quite badly , i believe . xxmaj little beggars , eh ? xxmaj but keen as mustard ! xxmaj that ’s a firstrate training they give them in the xxmaj spies nowadays — better than in my day , 
▁ even . xxmaj what d’you think ’s the latest thing they ’ ve served them out with ? xxmaj ear 
▁ trumpets for listening through keyholes ! xxmaj my little girl brought one home the 
▁ other night — tried it out on our sitting - room door , and reckoned she could 
▁ hear twice as much as with her ear to the hole . xxmaj of course it ’s only a toy , mind 
▁ you . xxmaj still , gives ’em the right idea , eh ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj at this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle . xxmaj it was the signal to 
▁ return to work . xxmaj all three men sprang to their feet to join in the struggle round 
▁ the lifts , and the remaining tobacco fell out of xxmaj winston ’s cigarette . 
▁ 35 
▁ xxmaj chapter 6 
▁ xxmaj winston was writing in his diary : 
▁ xxmaj it was three years ago . xxmaj it was on a dark evening , in a narrow side - street near 
▁ one of the big railway stations . xxmaj she was standing near a doorway in the wall , 
▁ under a street lamp that hardly gave any light . xxmaj she had a young face , painted 
▁ very thick . xxmaj it was really the paint that appealed to me , the whiteness of it , like 
▁ a mask , and the bright red lips . xxmaj party women never paint their faces . xxmaj there 
▁ was nobody else in the street , and no telescreens . xxmaj she said two dollars . i 
▁ xxmaj for the moment it was too difficult to go on . xxmaj he shut his eyes and pressed 
▁ his fingers against them , trying to squeeze out the vision that kept recurring . 
▁ xxmaj he had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string of filthy words 
▁ at the top of his voice . xxmaj or to bang his head against the wall , to kick over the 
▁ table , and hurl the inkpot through the window — to do any violent or noisy or 
▁ painful thing that might black out the memory that was tormenting him . 
▁ xxmaj your worst enemy , he reflected , was your own nervous system . xxmaj at any moment the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible symptom . xxmaj he thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks back ; 
▁ a quite ordinary - looking man , a xxmaj party member , aged thirty - five to forty , tallish 
▁ and thin , carrying a brief - case . xxmaj they were a few metres apart when the left side 
▁ of the man ’s face was suddenly contorted by a sort of spasm . xxmaj it happened again 
▁ just as they were passing one another : it was only a twitch , a quiver , rapid 
▁ as the clicking of a camera shutter , but obviously habitual . xxmaj he remembered 
▁ thinking at the time : xxmaj that poor devil is done for . xxmaj and what was frightening 
▁ was that the action was quite possibly unconscious . xxmaj the most deadly danger of 
▁ all was talking in your sleep . xxmaj there was no way of guarding against that , so far 
▁ as he could see . 
▁ xxmaj he drew his breath and went on writing : 
▁ i went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a basement 
▁ kitchen . xxmaj there was a bed against the wall , and a lamp on the table , turned 
▁ down very low . xxmaj she 
▁ xxmaj his teeth were set on edge . xxmaj he would have liked to spit . xxmaj simultaneously 
▁ with the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of xxmaj katharine , his wife . 
▁ xxmaj winston was married — had been married , at any rate : probably he still was 
▁ married , so far as he knew his wife was not dead . xxmaj he seemed to breathe again 
▁ the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitchen , an odour compounded of bugs 
▁ and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent , but nevertheless alluring , because 
▁ no woman of the xxmaj party ever used scent , or could be imagined as doing so . xxmaj only 
▁ the proles used scent . xxmaj in his mind the smell of it was inextricably mixed up 
▁ 36 
▁ with fornication . 
▁ xxmaj when he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years 
▁ or thereabouts . xxmaj consorting with prostitutes was forbidden , of course , but it 
▁ was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to break . xxmaj it 
▁ was dangerous , but it was not a life - and - death matter . xxmaj to be caught with a 
▁ prostitute might mean five years in a forced - labour camp : not more , if you had 
▁ committed no other offence . xxmaj and it was easy enough , provided that you could 
▁ avoid being caught in the act . xxmaj the poorer quarters swarmed with women who 
▁ were ready to sell themselves . xxmaj some could even be purchased for a bottle of 
▁ gin , which the proles were not supposed to drink . xxmaj tacitly the xxmaj party was even 
▁ inclined to encourage prostitution , as an outlet for instincts which could not 
▁ be altogether suppressed . xxmaj mere debauchery did not matter very much , so long 
▁ as it was furtive and joyless and only involved the women of a submerged and 
▁ despised class . xxmaj the unforgivable crime was promiscuity between xxmaj party members . 
▁ xxmaj but — though this was one of the crimes that the accused in the great purges 
▁ invariably confessed to — it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually 
▁ happening . 
▁ xxmaj the aim of the xxmaj party was not merely to prevent men and women from 
▁ forming loyalties which it might not be able to control . xxmaj its real , undeclared 
▁ purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act . xxmaj not love so much as 
▁ eroticism was the enemy , inside marriage as well as outside it . xxmaj all marriages 
▁ between xxmaj party members had to be approved by a committee appointed for the 
▁ purpose , and — though the principle was never clearly stated — permission was 
▁ always refused if the couple concerned gave the impression of being physically 
▁ attracted to one another . xxmaj the only recognized purpose of marriage was to beget 
▁ children for the service of the xxmaj party . xxmaj sexual intercourse was to be looked on as 
▁ a slightly disgusting minor operation , like having an enema . xxmaj this again was 
▁ never put into plain words , but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every 
▁ xxmaj party member from childhood onwards . xxmaj there were even organizations such as 
▁ the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league , which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes . 
▁ xxmaj all children were to be begotten by artificial insemination ( artsem , it was called 
▁ in xxmaj newspeak ) and brought up in public institutions . xxmaj this , xxmaj winston was aware , 
▁ was not meant altogether seriously , but somehow it fitted in with the general 
▁ ideology of the xxmaj party . xxmaj the xxmaj party was trying to kill the sex instinct , or , if it 
▁ could not be killed , then to distort it and dirty it . xxmaj he did not know why this 
▁ was so , but it seemed natural that it should be so . xxmaj and as far as the women 
▁ were concerned , the xxmaj party ’s efforts were largely successful . 
▁ xxmaj he thought again of xxmaj katharine . xxmaj it must be nine , ten — nearly eleven years 
▁ since they had parted . xxmaj it was curious how seldom he thought of her . xxmaj for days 
▁ at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married . xxmaj they had 
▁ only been together for about fifteen months . xxmaj the xxmaj party did not permit divorce , 
▁ but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there were no children . 
▁ xxmaj katharine was a tall , fair - haired girl , very straight , with splendid movements . 
▁ xxmaj she had a bold , aquiline face , a face that one might have called noble until one 
▁ discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing behind it . xxmaj very early in 
▁ her married life he had decided — though perhaps it was only that he knew her 
▁ more intimately than he knew most people — that she had without exception 
▁ the most stupid , vulgar , empty mind that he had ever encountered . xxmaj she had 
▁ not a thought in her head that was not a slogan , and there was no imbecility , 
▁ absolutely none that she was not capable of swallowing if the xxmaj party handed it 
▁ 37 
▁ out to her . ’ the human sound - track ’ he nicknamed her in his own mind . xxmaj yet 
▁ he could have endured living with her if it had not been for just one thing — 
▁ sex . 
▁ xxmaj as soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen . xxmaj to embrace 
▁ her was like embracing a jointed wooden image . xxmaj and what was strange was 
▁ that even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she 
▁ was simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength . xxmaj the rigidlty of 
▁ her muscles managed to convey that impression . xxmaj she would lie there with shut 
▁ eyes , neither resisting nor co - operating but submitting . xxmaj it was extraordinarily 
▁ embarrassing , and , after a while , horrible . xxmaj but even then he could have borne 
▁ living with her if it had been agreed that they should remain celibate . xxmaj but 
▁ curiously enough it was xxmaj katharine who refused this . xxmaj they must , she said , 
▁ produce a child if they could . xxmaj so the performance continued to happen , once a 
▁ week quite regulariy , whenever it was not impossible . xxmaj she even used to remind 
▁ him of it in the morning , as something which had to be done that evening and 
▁ which must not be forgotten . xxmaj she had two names for it . xxmaj one was ’ making a 
▁ baby ’ , and the other was ’ our duty to the xxmaj party ’ ( yes , she had actually used 
▁ that phrase ) . xxmaj quite soon he grew to have a feeling of positive dread when the 
▁ appointed day came round . xxmaj but luckily no child appeared , and in the end she 
▁ agreed to give up trying , and soon afterwards they parted . 
▁ xxmaj winston sighed inaudibly . xxmaj he picked up his pen again and wrote : 
▁ xxmaj she threw herself down on the bed , and at once , without any kind of preliminary in the most coarse , horrible way you can imagine , pulled up her skirt . 
▁ i 
▁ xxmaj he saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight , with the smell of bugs 
▁ and cheap scent in his nostrils , and in his heart a feeling of defeat and resentment 
▁ which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of xxmaj katharine ’s white 
▁ body , frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the xxmaj party . xxmaj why did it always 
▁ have to be like this ? xxmaj why could he not have a woman of his own instead of 
▁ these filthy scuffles at intervals of years ? xxmaj but a real love affair was an almost 
▁ unthinkable event . xxmaj the women of the xxmaj party were all alike . xxmaj chastity was as deep 
▁ ingrained in them as xxmaj party loyalty . xxmaj by careful early conditioning , by games and 
▁ cold water , by the rubbish that was dinned into them at school and in the xxmaj spies 
▁ and the xxmaj youth xxmaj league , by lectures , parades , songs , slogans , and martial music , 
▁ the natural feeling had been driven out of them . xxmaj his reason told him that there 
▁ must be exceptions , but his heart did not believe it . xxmaj they were all impregnable , 
▁ as the xxmaj party intended that they should be . xxmaj and what he wanted , more even 
▁ than to be loved , was to break down that wall of virtue , even if it were only once 
▁ in his whole life . xxmaj the sexual act , successfully performed , was rebellion . xxmaj desire 
▁ was thoughtcrime . xxmaj even to have awakened xxmaj katharine , if he could have achieved 
▁ it , would have been like a seduction , although she was his wife . 
▁ xxmaj but the rest of the story had got to be written down . xxmaj he wrote : 
▁ i turned up the lamp . xxmaj when i saw her in the light 
▁ xxmaj after the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very 
▁ bright . xxmaj for the first time he could see the woman properly . xxmaj he had taken a step 
▁ towards her and then halted , full of lust and terror . xxmaj he was painfully conscious 
▁ of the risk he had taken in coming here . xxmaj it was perfectly possible that the 
▁ patrols would catch him on the way out : for that matter they might be waiting 
▁ outside the door at this moment . xxmaj if he went away without even doing what he 
▁ had come here to do — ! 
▁ 38 
▁ xxmaj it had got to be written down , it had got to be confessed . xxmaj what he had 
▁ suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was old . xxmaj the paint was 
▁ plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack like a 
▁ cardboard mask . xxmaj there were streaks of white in her hair ; but the truly dreadful 
▁ detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open , revealing nothing except a 
▁ cavernous blackness . xxmaj she had no teeth at all . 
▁ xxmaj he wrote hurriedly , in scrabbling handwriting : 
▁ xxmaj when i saw her in the light she was quite an old woman , fifty years old at 
▁ least . xxmaj but i went ahead and did it just the same . 
▁ xxmaj he pressed his fingers against his eyelids again . xxmaj he had written it down at 
▁ last , but it made no difference . xxmaj the therapy had not worked . xxmaj the urge to shout 
▁ filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever . 
▁ 39 
▁ xxmaj chapter 7 
▁ xxmaj if there is hope , wrote xxmaj winston , it lies in the proles . 
▁ xxmaj if there was hope , it must lie in the proles , because only there in those 
▁ swarming disregarded masses , 85 per cent of the population of xxmaj oceania , could 
▁ the force to destroy the xxmaj party ever be generated . xxmaj the xxmaj party could not be overthrown from within . xxmaj its enemies , if it had any enemies , had no way of coming 
▁ together or even of identifying one another . xxmaj even if the legendary xxmaj brotherhood 
▁ existed , as just possibly it might , it was inconceivable that its members could 
▁ ever assemble in larger numbers than twos and threes . xxmaj rebellion meant a look 
▁ in the eyes , an inflexion of the voice , at the most , an occasional whispered 
▁ word . xxmaj but the proles , if only they could somehow become conscious of their 
▁ own strength . would have no need to conspire . xxmaj they needed only to rise up and 
▁ shake themselves like a horse shaking off flies . xxmaj if they chose they could blow 
▁ the xxmaj party to pieces tomorrow morning . xxmaj surely sooner or later it must occur to 
▁ them to do it ? xxmaj and yet- ! 
▁ xxmaj he remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when 
▁ a tremendous shout of hundreds of voices women ’s voices — had burst from a 
▁ side - street a little way ahead . xxmaj it was a great formidable cry of anger and despair , 
▁ a deep , loud ’ oh - o - o - o - oh ! ’ that went humming on like the reverberation of a 
▁ bell . xxmaj his heart had leapt . xxmaj it ’s started ! he had thought . a riot ! xxmaj the proles are 
▁ breaking loose at last ! xxmaj when he had reached the spot it was to see a mob of 
▁ two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls of a street market , with 
▁ faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed passengers on a sinking 
▁ ship . xxmaj but at this moment the general despair broke down into a multitude 
▁ of individual quarrels . xxmaj it appeared that one of the stalls had been selling tin 
▁ saucepans . xxmaj they were wretched , flimsy things , but cooking - pots of any kind 
▁ were always difficult to get . xxmaj now the supply had unexpectedly given out . xxmaj the 
▁ successful women , bumped and jostled by the rest , were trying to make off with 
▁ their saucepans while dozens of others clamoured round the stall , accusing the 
▁ stall - keeper of favouritism and of having more saucepans somewhere in reserve . 
▁ xxmaj there was a fresh outburst of yells . xxmaj two bloated women , one of them with her 
▁ hair coming down , had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear 
▁ it out of one another ’s hands . xxmaj for a moment they were both tugging , and then 
▁ the handle came off . xxmaj winston watched them disgustedly . xxmaj and yet , just for a 
▁ moment , what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from only a 
▁ few hundred throats ! xxmaj why was it that they could never shout like that about 
▁ anything that mattered ? 
▁ xxmaj he wrote : 
▁ 40 
▁ xxmaj until they become conscious they will never rebel , and until after they have 
▁ rebelled they can not become conscious . 
▁ xxmaj that , he reflected , might almost have been a transcription from one of the 
▁ xxmaj party textbooks . xxmaj the xxmaj party claimed , of course , to have liberated the proles 
▁ from bondage . xxmaj before the xxmaj revolution they had been hideously oppressed by the 
▁ capitalists , they had been starved and flogged , women had been forced to work 
▁ in the coal mines ( women still did work in the coal mines , as a matter of fact ) , 
▁ children had been sold into the factories at the age of six . xxmaj but simultaneously , 
▁ true to the xxmaj principles of doublethink , the xxmaj party taught that the proles were 
▁ natural inferiors who must be kept in subjection , like animals , by the application 
▁ of a few simple rules . xxmaj in reality very little was known about the proles . xxmaj it was 
▁ not necessary to know much . xxmaj so long as they continued to work and breed , 
▁ their other activities were without importance . xxmaj left to themselves , like cattle 
▁ turned loose upon the plains of xxmaj argentina , they had reverted to a style of life 
▁ that appeared to be natural to them , a sort of ancestral pattern . xxmaj they were 
▁ born , they grew up in the gutters , they went to work at twelve , they passed 
▁ through a brief blossoming - period of beauty and sexual desire , they married 
▁ at twenty , they were middle - aged at thirty , they died , for the most part , at 
▁ sixty . xxmaj heavy physical work , the care of home and children , petty quarrels with 
▁ neighbours , films , football , beer , and above all , gambling , filled up the horizon 
▁ of their minds . xxmaj to keep them in control was not difficult . a few agents of 
▁ the xxmaj thought xxmaj police moved always among them , spreading false rumours and 
▁ marking down and eliminating the few individuals who were judged capable of 
▁ becoming dangerous ; but no attempt was made to indoctrinate them with the 
▁ ideology of the xxmaj party . xxmaj it was not desirable that the proles should have strong 
▁ political feelings . xxmaj all that was required of them was a primitive patriotism which 
▁ could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer 
▁ working - hours or shorter rations . xxmaj and even when they became discontented , 
▁ as they sometimes did , their discontent led nowhere , because being without 
▁ general ideas , they could only focus it on petty specific grievances . xxmaj the larger 
▁ evils invariably escaped their notice . xxmaj the great majority of proles did not even 
▁ have telescreens in their homes . xxmaj even the civil police interfered with them 
▁ very little . xxmaj there was a vast amount of criminality in xxmaj london , a whole worldwithin - a - world of thieves , bandits , prostitutes , drug - peddlers , and racketeers of 
▁ every description ; but since it all happened among the proles themselves , it 
▁ was of no importance . xxmaj in all questions of morals they were allowed to follow 
▁ their ancestral code . xxmaj the sexual puritanism of the xxmaj party was not imposed upon 
▁ them . xxmaj promiscuity went unpunished , divorce was permitted . xxmaj for that matter , 
▁ even religious worship would have been permitted if the proles had shown any 
▁ sign of needing or wanting it . xxmaj they were beneath suspicion . xxmaj as the xxmaj party slogan 
▁ put it : ’ proles and animals are free . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer . xxmaj it had 
▁ begun itching again . xxmaj the thing you invariably came back to was the impossibility of knowing what life before the xxmaj revolution had really been like . xxmaj he took 
▁ out of the drawer a copy of a children ’s history textbook which he had borrowed 
▁ from xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , and began copying a passage into the diary : 
▁ xxmaj in the old days ( it ran ) , before the glorious xxmaj revolution , xxmaj london was not the 
▁ beautiful city that we know today . xxmaj it was a dark , dirty , miserable place where 
▁ hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and thousands of poor 
▁ people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to sleep under . xxmaj children 
▁ 41 
▁ no older than you had to work twelve hours a day for cruel masters who flogged 
▁ them with whips if they worked too slowly and fed them on nothing but stale 
▁ breadcrusts and water . 
▁ xxmaj but in among all this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful 
▁ houses that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to 
▁ look after them . xxmaj these rich men were called capitalists . xxmaj they were fat , ugly 
▁ men with wicked faces , like the one in the picture on the opposite page . xxmaj you 
▁ can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called a frock coat , 
▁ and a queer , shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe , which was called a top hat . xxmaj this 
▁ was the uniform of the capitalists , and no one else was allowed to wear it . xxmaj the 
▁ capitalists owned everything in the world , and everyone else was their slave . 
▁ xxmaj they owned all the land , all the houses , all the factories , and all the money . xxmaj if 
▁ anyone disobeyed them they could throw them into prison , or they could take 
▁ his job away and starve him to death . xxmaj when any ordinary person spoke to a 
▁ capitalist he had to cringe and bow to him , and take off his cap and address 
▁ him as ’ sir ’ . xxmaj the chief of all the capitalists was called the xxmaj king . and 
▁ xxmaj but he knew the rest of the catalogue . xxmaj there would be mention of the bishops 
▁ in their lawn sleeves , the judges in their ermine robes , the pillory , the stocks , 
▁ the treadmill , the cat - o’-nine tails , the xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor ’s xxmaj banquet , and the practice 
▁ of kissing the xxmaj pope ’s toe . xxmaj there was also something called the jus primae noctis , 
▁ which would probably not be mentioned in a textbook for children . xxmaj it was the 
▁ law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in 
▁ one of his factories . 
▁ xxmaj how could you tell how much of it was lies ? xxmaj it might be true that the average 
▁ human being was better off now than he had been before the xxmaj revolution . xxmaj the 
▁ only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones , the 
▁ instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were intolerable and that at 
▁ some other time they must have been different . xxmaj it struck him that the truly 
▁ characteristic thing about modern life was not its cruelty and insecurity , but 
▁ simply its bareness , its dinginess , its listlessness . xxmaj life , if you looked about you , 
▁ bore no resemblance not only to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens , 
▁ but even to the ideals that the xxmaj party was trying to achieve . xxmaj great areas of it , 
▁ even for a xxmaj party member , were neutral and non - political , a matter of slogging 
▁ through dreary jobs , fighting for a place on the xxmaj tube , darning a worn - out sock , 
▁ cadging a saccharine tablet , saving a cigarette end . xxmaj the ideal set up by the xxmaj party 
▁ was something huge , terrible , and glittering — a world of steel and concrete , of 
▁ monstrous machines and terrifying weapons — a nation of warriors and fanatics , 
▁ marching forward in perfect unity , all thinking the same thoughts and shouting 
▁ the same slogans , perpetually working , fighting , triumphing , persecuting — 
▁ three hundred million people all with the same face . xxmaj the reality was decaying , 
▁ dingy cities where underfed people shuffled to and fro in leaky shoes , in patchedup nineteenth - century houses that smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories . 
▁ xxmaj he seemed to see a vision of xxmaj london , vast and ruinous , city of a million dustbins , 
▁ and mixed up with it was a picture of xxmaj mrs xxmaj parsons , a woman with lined face 
▁ and wispy hair , fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste - pipe . 
▁ xxmaj he reached down and scratched his ankle again . xxmaj day and night the telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today had more 
▁ food , more clothes , better houses , better recreations — that they lived longer , 
▁ worked shorter hours , were bigger , healthier , stronger , happier , more intelligent , 
▁ better educated , than the people of fifty years ago . xxmaj not a word of it could ever 
▁ 42 
▁ be proved or disproved . xxmaj the xxmaj party claimed , for example , that today 40 per cent 
▁ of adult proles were literate : before the xxmaj revolution , it was said , the number had 
▁ only been 15 per cent . xxmaj the xxmaj party claimed that the infant mortality rate was 
▁ now only 160 per thousand , whereas before the xxmaj revolution it had been 300 — 
▁ and so it went on . xxmaj it was like a single equation with two unknowns . xxmaj it might 
▁ very well be that literally every word in the history books , even the things that 
▁ one accepted without question , was pure fantasy . xxmaj for all he knew there might 
▁ never have been any such law as the jus primae noctis , or any such creature as 
▁ a capitalist , or any such garment as a top hat . 
▁ xxmaj everything faded into mist . xxmaj the past was erased , the erasure was forgotten , 
▁ the lie became truth . xxmaj just once in his life he had possessed — after the event : 
▁ that was what counted — concrete , unmistakable evidence of an act of falsification . xxmaj he had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty seconds . xxmaj in 1973 , 
▁ it must have been — at any rate , 
▁ it was at about the time when he and xxmaj katharine had parted . xxmaj but the really 
▁ relevant date was seven or eight years earlier . 
▁ xxmaj the story really began in the middle sixties , the period of the great purges 
▁ in which the original leaders of the xxmaj revolution were wiped out once and for all . 
▁ xxmaj by 1970 none of them was left , except xxmaj big xxmaj brother himself . xxmaj all the rest had by 
▁ that time been exposed as traitors and counter- revolutionaries . xxmaj goldstein had 
▁ fled and was hiding no one knew where , and of the others , a few had simply 
▁ disappeared , while the majority had been executed after spectacular public trials 
▁ at which they made confession of their crimes . xxmaj among the last survivors were 
▁ three men named xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford . xxmaj it must have been in 1965 
▁ that these three had been arrested . xxmaj as often happened , they had vanished for 
▁ a year or more , so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead , and 
▁ then had suddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the usual 
▁ way . xxmaj they had confessed to intelligence with the enemy ( at that date , too , 
▁ the enemy was xxmaj eurasia ) , embezzlement of public funds , the murder of various 
▁ trusted xxmaj party members , intrigues against the leadership of xxmaj big xxmaj brother which 
▁ had started long before the xxmaj revolution happened , and acts of sabotage causing 
▁ the death of hundreds of thousands of people . xxmaj after confessing to these things 
▁ they had been pardoned , reinstated in the xxmaj party , and given posts which were in 
▁ fact sinecures but which sounded important . xxmaj all three had written long , abject 
▁ articles in xxmaj the xxmaj times , analysing the reasons for their defection and promising 
▁ to make amends . 
▁ xxmaj some time after their release xxmaj winston had actually seen all three of them 
▁ in the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree xxmaj caf´e . xxmaj he remembered the sort of terrified fascination 
▁ with which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye . xxmaj they were men 
▁ far older than himself , relics of the ancient world , almost the last great figures 
▁ left over from the heroic days of the xxmaj party . xxmaj the glamour of the underground 
▁ struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them . xxmaj he had the feeling , though 
▁ already at that time facts and dates were growing blurry , that he had known 
▁ their names years earlier than he had known that of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj but also 
▁ they were outlaws , enemies , untouchables , doomed with absolute certainty to 
▁ extinction within a year or two . xxmaj no one who had once fallen into the hands of 
▁ the xxmaj thought xxmaj police ever escaped in the end . xxmaj they were corpses waiting to be 
▁ sent back to the grave . 
▁ xxmaj there was no one at any of the tables nearest to them . xxmaj it was not wise even 
▁ to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people . xxmaj they were sitting in silence 
▁ 43 
▁ before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the speciality of the 
▁ caf´e . xxmaj of the three , it was xxmaj rutherford whose appearance had most impressed 
▁ xxmaj winston . xxmaj rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist , whose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before and during the xxmaj revolution . 
▁ xxmaj even now , at long intervals , his cartoons were appearing in xxmaj the xxmaj times . xxmaj they 
▁ were simply an imitation of his earlier manner , and curiously lifeless and unconvincing . xxmaj always they were a rehashing of the ancient themes — slum tenements , 
▁ starving children , street battles , capitalists in top hats — even on the barricades 
▁ the capitalists still seemed to cling to their top hats an endless , hopeless effort 
▁ to get back into the past . xxmaj he was a monstrous man , with a mane of greasy grey 
▁ hair , his face pouched and seamed , with thick negroid lips . xxmaj at one time he must 
▁ have been immensely strong ; now his great body was sagging , sloping , bulging , 
▁ falling away in every direction . xxmaj he seemed to be breaking up before one ’s eyes , 
▁ like a mountain crumbling . 
▁ xxmaj it was the lonely hour of fifteen . xxmaj winston could not now remember how 
▁ he had come to be in the caf´e at such a time . xxmaj the place was almost empty . 
▁ a tinny music was trickling from the telescreens . xxmaj the three men sat in their 
▁ corner almost motionless , never speaking . xxmaj uncommanded , the waiter brought 
▁ fresh glasses of gin . xxmaj there was a chessboard on the table beside them , with 
▁ the pieces set out but no game started . xxmaj and then , for perhaps half a minute 
▁ in all , something happened to the telescreens . xxmaj the tune that they were playing 
▁ changed , and the tone of the music changed too . xxmaj there came into it — but 
▁ it was something hard to describe . xxmaj it was a peculiar , cracked , braying , jeering 
▁ note : in his mind xxmaj winston called it a yellow note . xxmaj and then a voice from the 
▁ telescreen was singing : 
▁ xxmaj under the spreading chestnut tree 
▁ i sold you and you sold me : 
▁ xxmaj there lie they , and here lie we 
▁ xxmaj under the spreading chestnut tree . 
▁ xxmaj the three men never stirred . xxmaj but when xxmaj winston glanced again at xxmaj rutherford ’s ruinous face , he saw that his eyes were full of tears . xxmaj and for the first 
▁ time he noticed , with a kind of inward shudder , and yet not knowing at what 
▁ he shuddered , that both xxmaj aaronson and xxmaj rutherford had broken noses . 
▁ a little later all three were re - arrested . xxmaj it appeared that they had engaged 
▁ in fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release . xxmaj at their second 
▁ trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again , with a whole string of new 
▁ ones . xxmaj they were executed , and their fate was recorded in the xxmaj party histories , a 
▁ warning to posterity . xxmaj about five years after this , in 1973 , xxmaj winston was unrolling 
▁ a wad of documents which had just flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his 
▁ desk when he came on a fragment of paper which had evidently been slipped 
▁ in among the others and then forgotten . xxmaj the instant he had flattened it out 
▁ he saw its significance . xxmaj it was a half - page torn out of xxmaj the xxmaj times of about ten 
▁ years earlier — the top half of the page , so that it included the date — and it 
▁ contained a photograph of the delegates at some xxmaj party function in xxmaj new xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj prominent in the middle of the group were xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford . 
▁ xxmaj there was no mistaking them , in any case their names were in the caption at 
▁ the bottom . 
▁ xxmaj the point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that 
▁ date they had been on xxmaj eurasian soil . xxmaj they had flown from a secret airfield in 
▁ xxmaj canada to a rendezvous somewhere in xxmaj siberia , and had conferred with members 
▁ 44 
▁ of the xxmaj eurasian xxmaj general xxmaj staff , to whom they had betrayed important military 
▁ secrets . xxmaj the date had stuck in xxmaj winston ’s memory because it chanced to be 
▁ midsummer day ; but the whole story must be on record in countless other 
▁ places as well . xxmaj there was only one possible conclusion : the confessions were 
▁ lies . 
▁ xxmaj of course , this was not in itself a discovery . xxmaj even at that time xxmaj winston had 
▁ not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had actually 
▁ committed the crimes that they were accused of . xxmaj but this was concrete evidence ; 
▁ it was a fragment of the abolished past , like a fossil bone which turns up in the 
▁ wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory . xxmaj it was enough to blow the 
▁ xxmaj party to atoms , if in some way it could have been published to the world and 
▁ its significance made known . 
▁ xxmaj he had gone straight on working . xxmaj as soon as he saw what the photograph 
▁ was , and what it meant , he had covered it up with another sheet of paper . 
▁ xxmaj luckily , when he unrolled it , it had been upside - down from the point of view of 
▁ the telescreen . 
▁ xxmaj he took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so as to get 
▁ as far away from the telescreen as possible . xxmaj to keep your face expressionless was 
▁ not difficult , and even your breathing could be controlled , with an effort : but you 
▁ could not control the beating of your heart , and the telescreen was quite delicate 
▁ enough to pick it up . xxmaj he let what he judged to be ten minutes go by , tormented 
▁ all the while by the fear that some accident — a sudden draught blowing across 
▁ his desk , for instance — would betray him . xxmaj then , without uncovering it again , 
▁ he dropped the photograph into the memory hole , along with some other waste 
▁ papers . xxmaj within another minute , perhaps , it would have crumbled into ashes . 
▁ xxmaj that was ten — eleven years ago . xxmaj today , probably , he would have kept that 
▁ photograph . xxmaj it was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers seemed 
▁ to him to make a difference even now , when the photograph itself , as well as 
▁ the event it recorded , was only memory . xxmaj was the xxmaj party ’s hold upon the past 
▁ less strong , he wondered , because a piece of evidence which existed no longer 
▁ had once existed ? 
▁ xxmaj but today , supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its ashes , 
▁ the photograph might not even be evidence . xxmaj already , at the time when he made 
▁ his discovery , xxmaj oceania was no longer at war with xxmaj eurasia , and it must have been 
▁ to the agents of xxmaj eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed their country . 
▁ xxmaj since then there had been other changes — two , three , he could not remember 
▁ how many . xxmaj very likely the confessions had been rewritten and rewritten until 
▁ the original facts and dates no longer had the smallest significance . xxmaj the past not 
▁ only changed , but changed continuously . xxmaj what most afflicted him with the sense 
▁ of nightmare was that he had never clearly understood why the huge imposture 
▁ was undertaken . xxmaj the immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious , 
▁ but the ultimate motive was mysterious . xxmaj he took up his pen again and wrote : 
▁ i understand xxup how : i do not understand xxup why . 
▁ xxmaj he wondered , as he had many times wondered before , whether he himself 
▁ was a lunatic . xxmaj perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one . xxmaj at one time it 
▁ had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun ; today , 
▁ to believe that the past is inalterable . xxmaj he might be alone in holding that belief , 
▁ and if alone , then a lunatic . xxmaj but the thought of being a lunatic did not greatly 
▁ trouble him : the horror was that he might also be wrong . 
▁ xxmaj he picked up the children ’s history book and looked at the portrait of xxmaj big 
▁ 45 
▁ xxmaj brother which formed its frontispiece . xxmaj the hypnotic eyes gazed into his own . 
▁ xxmaj it was as though some huge force were pressing down upon you — something 
▁ that penetrated inside your skull , battering against your brain , frightening you 
▁ out of your beliefs , persuading you , almost , to deny the evidence of your senses . 
▁ xxmaj in the end the xxmaj party would announce that two and two made five , and you 
▁ would have to believe it . xxmaj it was inevitable that they should make that claim 
▁ sooner or later : the logic of their position demanded it . xxmaj not merely the validity 
▁ of experience , but the very existence of external reality , was tacitly denied by 
▁ their philosophy . xxmaj the heresy of heresies was common sense . xxmaj and what was 
▁ terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking otherwise , but that they 
▁ might be right . xxmaj for , after all , how do we know that two and two make four ? 
▁ xxmaj or that the force of gravity works ? xxmaj or that the past is unchangeable ? xxmaj if both 
▁ the past and the external world exist only in the mind , and if the mind itself is 
▁ controllable what then ? 
▁ xxmaj but no ! xxmaj his courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord . xxmaj the face 
▁ of o’brien , not called up by any obvious association , had floated into his mind . 
▁ xxmaj he knew , with more certainty than before , that o’brien was on his side . xxmaj he was 
▁ writing the diary for o’brien — to o’brien : it was like an interminable letter 
▁ which no one would ever read , but which was addressed to a particular person 
▁ and took its colour from that fact . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears . xxmaj it was their 
▁ final , most essential command . xxmaj his heart sank as he thought of the enormous 
▁ power arrayed against him , the ease with which any xxmaj party intellectual would 
▁ overthrow him in debate , the subtle arguments which he would not be able 
▁ to understand , much less answer . xxmaj and yet he was in the right ! xxmaj they were 
▁ wrong and he was right . xxmaj the obvious , the silly , and the true had got to be 
▁ defended . xxmaj truisms are true , hold on to that ! xxmaj the solid world exists , its laws do 
▁ not change . xxmaj stones are hard , water is wet , objects unsupported fall towards the 
▁ earth ’s centre . xxmaj with the feeling that he was speaking to o’brien , and also that 
▁ he was setting forth an important axiom , he wrote : 
▁ xxmaj freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four . xxmaj if that is granted , 
▁ all else follows . 
▁ 46 
▁ xxmaj chapter 8 
▁ xxmaj from somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting coffee — real 
▁ coffee , not xxmaj victory xxmaj coffee — came floating out into the street . xxmaj winston paused 
▁ involuntarily . xxmaj for perhaps two seconds he was back in the half - forgotten world 
▁ of his childhood . xxmaj then a door banged , seeming to cut off the smell as abruptly 
▁ as though it had been a sound . 
▁ xxmaj he had walked several kilometres over pavements , and his varicose ulcer 
▁ was throbbing . xxmaj this was the second time in three weeks that he had missed 
▁ an evening at the xxmaj community xxmaj centre : a rash act , since you could be certain 
▁ that the number of your attendances at the xxmaj centre was carefully checked . xxmaj in 
▁ principle a xxmaj party member had no spare time , and was never alone except in 
▁ bed . xxmaj it was assumed that when he was not working , eating , or sleeping he 
▁ would be taking part in some kind of communal recreation : to do anything that 
▁ suggested a taste for solitude , even to go for a walk by yourself , was always 
▁ slightly dangerous . xxmaj there was a word for it in xxmaj newspeak : ownlife , it was called , 
▁ meaning individualism and eccentricity . xxmaj but this evening as he came out of the 
▁ xxmaj ministry the balminess of the xxmaj april air had tempted him . xxmaj the sky was a warmer 
▁ blue than he had seen it that year , and suddenly the long , noisy evening at the 
▁ xxmaj centre , the boring , exhausting games , the lectures , the creaking camaraderie 
▁ oiled by gin , had seemed intolerable . xxmaj on impulse he had turned away from the 
▁ bus - stop and wandered off into the labyrinth of xxmaj london , first south , then east , 
▁ then north again , losing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering 
▁ in which direction he was going . 
▁ ’ if there is hope , ’ he had written in the diary , ’ it lies in the proles . ’ xxmaj the words 
▁ kept coming back to him , statement of a mystical truth and a palpable absurdity . 
▁ xxmaj he was somewhere in the vague , brown - coloured slums to the north and east 
▁ of what had once been xxmaj saint xxmaj pancras xxmaj station . xxmaj he was walking up a cobbled 
▁ street of little two - storey houses with battered doorways which gave straight on 
▁ the pavement and which were somehow curiously suggestive of ratholes . xxmaj there 
▁ were puddles of filthy water here and there among the cobbles . xxmaj in and out 
▁ of the dark doorways , and down narrow alley - ways that branched off on either 
▁ side , people swarmed in astonishing numbers — girls in full bloom , with crudely 
▁ lipsticked mouths , and youths who chased the girls , and swollen waddling women 
▁ who showed you what the girls would be like in ten years ’ time , and old bent 
▁ creatures shuffling along on splayed feet , and ragged barefooted children who 
▁ played in the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their mothers . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded up . 
▁ xxmaj most of the people paid no attention to xxmaj winston ; a few eyed him with a sort 
▁ 47 
▁ of guarded curiosity . xxmaj two monstrous women with brick - red forearms folded 
▁ across thelr aprons were talking outside a doorway . xxmaj winston caught scraps of 
▁ conversation as he approached . 
▁ ’ ” yes , ” i says to ’ er , ” that ’s all very well , ” i says . ” but if you ’d of been in 
▁ my place you ’d of done the same as what i done . xxmaj it ’s easy to criticize , ” i says , 
▁ ” but you ai n’t got the same problems as what i got . ” ’ 
▁ ’ ah , ’ said the other , ’ that ’s jest it . xxmaj that ’s jest where it is . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the strident voices stopped abruptly . xxmaj the women studied him in hostile 
▁ silence as he went past . xxmaj but it was not hostility , exactly ; merely a kind of 
▁ wariness , a momentary stiffening , as at the passing of some unfamiliar animal . 
▁ xxmaj the blue overalls of the xxmaj party could not be a common sight in a street like this . 
▁ xxmaj indeed , it was unwise to be seen in such places , unless you had definite business 
▁ there . xxmaj the patrols might stop you if you happened to run into them . ’ may i 
▁ see your papers , comrade ? xxmaj what are you doing here ? xxmaj what time did you leave 
▁ work ? xxmaj is this your usual way home ? ’ — and so on and so forth . xxmaj not that there 
▁ was any rule against walking home by an unusual route : but it was enough to 
▁ draw attention to you if the xxmaj thought xxmaj police heard about it . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly the whole street was in commotion . xxmaj there were yells of warning 
▁ from all sides . xxmaj people were shooting into the doorways like rabbits . a young 
▁ woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of xxmaj winston , grabbed up a tiny 
▁ child playing in a puddle , whipped her apron round it , and leapt back again , 
▁ all in one movement . xxmaj at the same instant a man in a concertina - like black suit , 
▁ who had emerged from a side alley , ran towards xxmaj winston , pointing excitedly to 
▁ the sky . 
▁ ’ steamer ! ’ he yelled . ’ look out , guv’nor ! xxmaj bang over’ead ! xxmaj lay down quick ! ’ 
▁ ’ steamer ’ was a nickname which , for some reason , the proles applied to 
▁ rocket bombs . xxmaj winston promptly flung himself on his face . xxmaj the proles were 
▁ nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind . xxmaj they seemed to 
▁ possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance when a 
▁ rocket was coming , although the rockets supposedly travelled faster than sound . 
▁ xxmaj winston clasped his forearms above his head . xxmaj there was a roar that seemed 
▁ to make the pavement heave ; a shower of light objects pattered on to his back . 
▁ xxmaj when he stood up he found that he was covered with fragments of glass from 
▁ the nearest window . 
▁ xxmaj he walked on . xxmaj the bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up 
▁ the street . a black plume of smoke hung in the sky , and below it a cloud of 
▁ plaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins . xxmaj there was 
▁ a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him , and in the middle of 
▁ it he could see a bright red streak . xxmaj when he got up to it he saw that it was a 
▁ human hand severed at the wrist . xxmaj apart from the bloody stump , the hand was 
▁ so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast . 
▁ xxmaj he kicked the thing into the gutter , and then , to avoid the crowd , turned 
▁ down a side - street to the right . xxmaj within three or four minutes he was out of the 
▁ area which the bomb had affected , and the sordid swarming life of the streets 
▁ was going on as though nothing had happened . xxmaj it was nearly twenty hours , and 
▁ the drinking - shops which the proles frequented ( ’ pubs ’ , they called them ) were 
▁ choked with customers . xxmaj from their grimy swing doors , endlessly opening and 
▁ shutting , there came forth a smell of urine , sawdust , and sour beer . xxmaj in an angle 
▁ formed by a projecting house - front three men were standing very close together , 
▁ the middle one of them holding a folded - up newspaper which the other two were 
▁ 48 
▁ studying over his shoulder . xxmaj even before he was near enough to make out the 
▁ expression on their faces , xxmaj winston could see absorption in every line of their 
▁ bodies . xxmaj it was obviously some serious piece of news that they were reading . xxmaj he 
▁ was a few paces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of 
▁ the men were in violent altercation . xxmaj for a moment they seemed almost on the 
▁ point of blows . 
▁ ’ ca n’t you bleeding well listen to what i say ? i tell you no number ending 
▁ in seven ai n’t won for over fourteen months ! ’ 
▁ ’ yes , it ’ as , then ! ’ 
▁ ’ no , it ’ as not ! xxmaj back ’ ome i got the ’ ole lot of ’em for over two years wrote 
▁ down on a piece of paper . i takes ’em down reg’lar as the clock . xxmaj an ’ i tell you , 
▁ no number ending in seven- ’ 
▁ ’ yes , a seven ’ as won ! i could pretty near tell you the bleeding number . xxmaj four 
▁ oh seven , it ended in . xxmaj it were in xxmaj february — second week in xxmaj february . ’ 
▁ ’ february your grandmother ! i got it all down in black and white . xxmaj an ’ i tell 
▁ you , no number- ’ 
▁ ’ oh , pack it in ! ’ said the third man . 
▁ xxmaj they were talking about the xxmaj lottery . xxmaj winston looked back when he had 
▁ gone thirty metres . xxmaj they were still arguing , with vivid , passionate faces . xxmaj the 
▁ xxmaj lottery , with its weekly pay - out of enormous prizes , was the one public event 
▁ to which the proles paid serious attention . xxmaj it was probable that there were 
▁ some millions of proles for whom the xxmaj lottery was the principal if not the only 
▁ reason for remaining alive . xxmaj it was their delight , their folly , their anodyne , their 
▁ intellectual stimulant . xxmaj where the xxmaj lottery was concerned , even people who could 
▁ barely read and write seemed capable of intricate calculations and staggering 
▁ feats of memory . xxmaj there was a whole tribe of men who made a living simply 
▁ by selling systems , forecasts , and lucky amulets . xxmaj winston had nothing to do 
▁ with the running of the xxmaj lottery , which was managed by the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty , 
▁ but he was aware ( indeed everyone in the party was aware ) that the prizes were 
▁ largely imaginary . xxmaj only small sums were actually paid out , the winners of the big 
▁ prizes being non - existent persons . xxmaj in the absence of any real intercommunication 
▁ between one part of xxmaj oceania and another , this was not difficult to arrange . 
▁ xxmaj but if there was hope , it lay in the proles . xxmaj you had to cling on to that . 
▁ xxmaj when you put it in words it sounded reasonable : it was when you looked at 
▁ the human beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act of faith . 
▁ xxmaj the street into which he had turned ran downhill . xxmaj he had a feeling that he 
▁ had been in this neighbourhood before , and that there was a main thoroughfare 
▁ not far away . xxmaj from somewhere ahead there came a din of shouting voices . xxmaj the 
▁ street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight of steps which led down into 
▁ a sunken alley where a few stall - keepers were selling tired - looking vegetables . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment xxmaj winston remembered where he was . xxmaj the alley led out into 
▁ the main street , and down the next turning , not five minutes away , was the 
▁ junk - shop where he had bought the blank book which was now his diary . xxmaj and 
▁ in a small stationer ’s shop not far away he had bought his penholder and his 
▁ bottle of ink . 
▁ xxmaj he paused for a moment at the top of the steps . xxmaj on the opposite side of the 
▁ alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted over but 
▁ in reality were merely coated with dust . a very old man , bent but active , with 
▁ white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn , pushed open the 
▁ swing door and went in . xxmaj as xxmaj winston stood watching , it occurred to him that 
▁ 49 
▁ the old man , who must be eighty at the least , had already been middle - aged 
▁ when the xxmaj revolution happened . xxmaj he and a few others like him were the last links 
▁ that now existed with the vanished world of capitalism . xxmaj in the xxmaj party itself there 
▁ were not many people left whose ideas had been formed before the xxmaj revolution . 
▁ xxmaj the older generation had mostly been wiped out in the great purges of the 
▁ fifties and sixties , and the few who survived had long ago been terrified into 
▁ complete intellectual surrender . xxmaj if there was any one still alive who could give 
▁ you a truthful account of conditions in the early part of the century , it could 
▁ only be a prole . xxmaj suddenly the passage from the history book that he had copied 
▁ into his diary came back into xxmaj winston ’s mind , and a lunatic impulse took hold 
▁ of him . xxmaj he would go into the pub , he would scrape acquaintance with that old 
▁ man and question him . xxmaj he would say to him : ’ tell me about your life when you 
▁ were a boy . xxmaj what was it like in those days ? xxmaj were things better than they are 
▁ now , or were they worse ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj hurriedly , lest he should have time to become frightened , he descended the 
▁ steps and crossed the narrow street . xxmaj it was madness of course . xxmaj as usual , there 
▁ was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their pubs , but 
▁ it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed . xxmaj if the patrols appeared he 
▁ might plead an attack of faintness , but it was not likely that they would believe 
▁ him . xxmaj he pushed open the door , and a hideous cheesy smell of sour beer hit him 
▁ in the face . xxmaj as he entered the din of voices dropped to about half its volume . 
▁ xxmaj behind his back he could feel everyone eyeing his blue overalls . a game of darts 
▁ which was going on at the other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps 
▁ as much as thirty seconds . xxmaj the old man whom he had followed was standing 
▁ at the bar , having some kind of altercation with the barman , a large , stout , 
▁ hook - nosed young man with enormous forearms . a knot of others , standing 
▁ round with glasses in their hands , were watching the scene . 
▁ ’ i arst you civil enough , did n’t xxup i ? ’ said the old man , straightening his shoulders pugnaciously . ’ you telling me you ai n’t got a pint mug in the ’ ole bleeding 
▁ boozer ? ’ 
▁ ’ and what in hell ’s name is a pint ? ’ said the barman , leaning forward with 
▁ the tips of his fingers on the counter . 
▁ ’ ark at ’ i m ! xxmaj calls ’ isself a barman and do n’t know what a pint is ! xxmaj why , a 
▁ pint ’s the ’ alf of a quart , and there ’s four quarts to the gallon . ’ ave to teach 
▁ you the xxup a , xxup b , c next . ’ 
▁ ’ never heard of ’em , ’ said the barman shortly . ’ litre and half litre — that ’s 
▁ all we serve . xxmaj there ’s the glasses on the shelf in front of you . 
▁ ’ i likes a pint , ’ persisted the old man . ’ you could ’ a drawed me off a pint 
▁ easy enough . xxmaj we did n’t ’ ave these bleeding litres when i was a young man . ’ 
▁ ’ when you were a young man we were all living in the treetops , ’ said the 
▁ barman , with a glance at the other customers . 
▁ xxmaj there was a shout of laughter , and the uneasiness caused by xxmaj winston ’s entry 
▁ seemed to disappear . xxmaj the old man ’s whitestubbled face had flushed pink . xxmaj he 
▁ turned away , muttering to himself , and bumped into xxmaj winston . xxmaj winston caught 
▁ him gently by the arm . 
▁ ’ may i offer you a drink ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ you ’re a gent , ’ said the other , straightening his shoulders again . xxmaj he appeared not to have noticed xxmaj winston ’s blue overalls . ’ pint ! ’ he added aggressively 
▁ to the barman . ’ pint of wallop . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the barman swished two half - litres of dark - brown beer into thick glasses 
▁ 50 
▁ which he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter . xxmaj beer was the only drink you 
▁ could get in prole pubs . xxmaj the proles were supposed not to drink gin , though in 
▁ practice they could get hold of it easily enough . xxmaj the game of darts was in full 
▁ swing again , and the knot of men at the bar had begun talking about lottery 
▁ tickets . xxmaj winston ’s presence was forgotten for a moment . xxmaj there was a deal table 
▁ under the window where he and the old man could talk without fear of being 
▁ overheard . xxmaj it was horribly dangerous , but at any rate there was no telescreen 
▁ in the room , a point he had made sure of as soon as he came in . 
▁ ” e could ’ a drawed me off a pint , ’ grumbled the old man as he settled down 
▁ behind a glass . ’ a ’ alf litre ai n’t enough . xxmaj it do n’t satisfy . xxmaj and a ’ ole litre ’s too 
▁ much . xxmaj it starts my bladder running . xxmaj let alone the price . ’ 
▁ ’ you must have seen great changes since you were a young man , ’ said xxmaj winston tentatively . 
▁ xxmaj the old man ’s pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar , and 
▁ from the bar to the door of the xxmaj gents , as though it were in the bar - room that 
▁ he expected the changes to have occurred . 
▁ ’ the beer was better , ’ he said finally . ’ and cheaper ! xxmaj when i was a young 
▁ man , mild beer — wallop we used to call it — was fourpence a pint . xxmaj that was 
▁ before the war , of course . ’ 
▁ ’ which war was that ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ it ’s all wars , ’ said the old man vaguely . xxmaj he took up his glass , and his 
▁ shoulders straightened again . ” ere ’s wishing you the very best of ’ ealth ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj in his lean throat the sharp - pointed xxmaj adam ’s apple made a surprisingly rapid 
▁ up - and - down movement , and the beer vanished . xxmaj winston went to the bar and 
▁ came back with two more half - litres . xxmaj the old man appeared to have forgotten 
▁ his prejudice against drinking a full litre . 
▁ ’ you are very much older than i am , ’ said xxmaj winston . ’ you must have been a 
▁ grown man before i was born . xxmaj you can remember what it was like in the old 
▁ days , before the xxmaj revolution . xxmaj people of my age do n’t really know anything about 
▁ those times . xxmaj we can only read about them in books , and what it says in the 
▁ books may not be true . i should like your opinion on that . xxmaj the history books 
▁ say that life before the xxmaj revolution was completely different from what it is now . 
▁ xxmaj there was the most terrible oppression , injustice , poverty worse than anything 
▁ we can imagine . xxmaj here in xxmaj london , the great mass of the people never had enough 
▁ to eat from birth to death . xxmaj half of them had n’t even boots on their feet . xxmaj they 
▁ worked twelve hours a day , they left school at nine , they slept ten in a room . 
▁ xxmaj and at the same time there were a very few people , only a few thousands — 
▁ the capitalists , they were called — who were rich and powerful . xxmaj they owned 
▁ everything that there was to own . xxmaj they lived in great gorgeous houses with 
▁ thirty servants , they rode about in motor - cars and four - horse carriages , they 
▁ drank champagne , they wore top hats- ’ 
▁ xxmaj the old man brightened suddenly . 
▁ ’ top ’ ats ! ’ he said . ’ funny you should mention ’em . xxmaj the same thing come 
▁ into my ’ ead only yesterday , i dono why . i was jest thinking , i ai n’t seen a top 
▁ ’ at in years . xxmaj gorn right out , they ’ ave . xxmaj the last time i wore one was at my 
▁ sister - in - law ’s funeral . xxmaj and that was — well , i could n’t give you the date , but 
▁ it must’a been fifty years ago . xxmaj of course it was only ’ ired for the occasion , you 
▁ understand . ’ 
▁ ’ it is n’t very important about the top hats , ’ said xxmaj winston patiently . ’ the 
▁ point is , these capitalists — they and a few lawyers and priests and so forth 
▁ 51 
▁ who lived on them — were the lords of the earth . xxmaj everything existed for their 
▁ benefit . xxmaj you — the ordinary people , the workers — were their slaves . xxmaj they 
▁ could do what they liked with you . xxmaj they could ship you off to xxmaj canada like 
▁ cattle . xxmaj they could sleep with your daughters if they chose . xxmaj they could order 
▁ you to be flogged with something called a cat - o’-nine tails . xxmaj you had to take 
▁ your cap off when you passed them . xxmaj every capitalist went about with a gang of 
▁ lackeys who- ’ 
▁ xxmaj the old man brightened again . 
▁ ’ lackeys ! ’ he said . ’ now there ’s a word i ai n’t ’ eard since ever so long . 
▁ xxmaj lackeys ! xxmaj that reg’lar takes me back , that does . i recollect oh , donkey ’s years 
▁ ago — i used to sometimes go to ’ yde xxmaj park of a xxmaj sunday afternoon to ’ ear the 
▁ blokes making speeches . xxmaj salvation xxmaj army , xxmaj roman xxmaj catholics , xxmaj jews , xxmaj indians — all 
▁ sorts there was . xxmaj and there was one bloke — well , i could n’t give you ’ is name , 
▁ but a real powerful speaker ’ e was . ’ e did n’t ’ alf give it ’em ! ” lackeys ! ” ’ e says , 
▁ ” lackeys of the bourgeoisie ! xxmaj flunkies of the ruling class ! ” xxmaj parasites — that was 
▁ another of them . xxmaj and ’ yenas — ’ e definitely called ’em ’ yenas . xxmaj of course ’ e was 
▁ referring to the xxmaj labour xxmaj party , you understand . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross - purposes . 
▁ ’ what i really wanted to know was this , ’ he said . ’ do you feel that you have 
▁ more freedom now than you had in those days ? xxmaj are you treated more like a 
▁ human being ? xxmaj in the old days , the rich people , the people at the top- ’ 
▁ ’ the ’ ouse of xxmaj lords , ’ put in the old man reminiscently . 
▁ ’ the xxmaj house of xxmaj lords , if you like . xxmaj what i am asking is , were these people able 
▁ to treat you as an inferior , simply because they were rich and you were poor ? 
▁ xxmaj is it a fact , for instance , that you had to call them ” sir ” and take off your cap 
▁ when you passed them ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj the old man appeared to think deeply . xxmaj he drank off about a quarter of his 
▁ beer before answering . 
▁ ’ yes , ’ he said . ’ they liked you to touch your cap to ’em . xxmaj it showed respect , 
▁ like . i did n’t agree with it , myself , but i done it often enough . xxmaj had to , as you 
▁ might say . ’ 
▁ ’ and was it usual — xxmaj i ’ m only quoting what xxmaj i ’ ve read in history books — 
▁ was it usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement 
▁ into the gutter ? ’ 
▁ ’ one of ’em pushed me once , ’ said the old man . ’ i recollect it as if it was 
▁ yesterday . xxmaj it was xxmaj boat xxmaj race night — terribly rowdy they used to get on xxmaj boat 
▁ xxmaj race night — and i bumps into a young bloke on xxmaj shaftesbury xxmaj avenue . xxmaj quite 
▁ a gent , ’ e was — dress shirt , top ’ at , black overcoat . ’ e was kind of zig - zagging 
▁ across the pavement , and i bumps into ’ i m accidental - like . ’ e says , ” why ca n’t 
▁ you look where you ’re going ? ” ’ e says . i say , ” ju think you ’ ve bought the 
▁ bleeding pavement ? ” ’ e says , ” i ’ll twist your bloody ’ ead off if you get fresh 
▁ with me . ” i says , ” you ’re drunk . xxmaj i ’ll give you in charge in ’ alf a minute , ” i says . 
▁ xxmaj an ’ if you ’ll believe me , ’ e puts ’ is ’ and on my chest and gives me a shove as 
▁ pretty near sent me under the wheels of a bus . xxmaj well , i was young in them days , 
▁ and i was going to ’ ave fetched ’ i m one , only- ’ 
▁ a sense of helplessness took hold of xxmaj winston . xxmaj the old man ’s memory was 
▁ nothing but a rubbish - heap of details . xxmaj one could question him all day without 
▁ getting any real information . xxmaj the party histories might still be true , after a 
▁ fashion : they might even be completely true . xxmaj he made a last attempt . 
▁ 52 
▁ ’ perhaps i have not made myself clear , ’ he said . ’ what xxmaj i ’ m trying to say is 
▁ this . xxmaj you have been alive a very long time ; you lived half your life before the 
▁ xxmaj revolution . xxmaj in 1925 , for instance , you were already grown up . xxmaj would you say 
▁ from what you can remember , that life in 1925 was better than it is now , or 
▁ worse ? xxmaj if you could choose , would you prefer to live then or now ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj the old man looked meditatively at the darts board . xxmaj he finished up his beer , 
▁ more slowly than before . xxmaj when he spoke it was with a tolerant philosophical 
▁ air , as though the beer had mellowed him . 
▁ ’ i know what you expect me to say , ’ he said . ’ you expect me to say as xxmaj i ’d 
▁ sooner be young again . xxmaj most people’d say they ’d sooner be young , if you arst ’ 
▁ ’em . xxmaj you got your ’ ealth and strength when you ’re young . xxmaj when you get to 
▁ my time of life you ai n’t never well . i suffer something wicked from my feet , 
▁ and my bladder ’s jest terrible . xxmaj six and seven times a night it ’ as me out of bed . 
▁ xxmaj on the other ’ and , there ’s great advantages in being a old man . xxmaj you ai n’t got 
▁ the same worries . xxmaj no truck with women , and that ’s a great thing . i ai n’t ’ ad a 
▁ woman for near on thirty year , if you ’d credit it . xxmaj nor wanted to , what ’s more . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston sat back against the window - sill . xxmaj it was no use going on . xxmaj he was 
▁ about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled 
▁ rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room . xxmaj the extra half - litre was 
▁ already working on him . xxmaj winston sat for a minute or two gazing at his empty 
▁ glass , and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out into the street again . 
▁ xxmaj within twenty years at the most , he reflected , the huge and simple question , 
▁ ’ was life better before the xxmaj revolution than it is now ? ’ would have ceased once 
▁ and for all to be answerable . xxmaj but in effect it was unanswerable even now , since 
▁ the few scattered survivors from the ancient world were incapable of comparing 
▁ one age with another . xxmaj they remembered a million useless things , a quarrel 
▁ with a workmate , a hunt for a lost bicycle pump , the expression on a long - dead 
▁ sister ’s face , the swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago : but all 
▁ the relevant facts were outside the range of their vision . xxmaj they were like the ant , 
▁ which can see small objects but not large ones . xxmaj and when memory failed and 
▁ written records were falsified — when that happened , the claim of the xxmaj party 
▁ to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted , because 
▁ there did not exist , and never again could exist , any standard against which it 
▁ could be tested . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly . xxmaj he halted and looked 
▁ up . xxmaj he was in a narrow street , with a few dark little shops , interspersed among 
▁ dwelling - houses . xxmaj immediately above his head there hung three discoloured metal 
▁ balls which looked as if they had once been gilded . xxmaj he seemed to know the 
▁ place . xxmaj of course ! xxmaj he was standing outside the junk - shop where he had bought 
▁ the diary . 
▁ a twinge of fear went through him . xxmaj it had been a sufficiently rash act to buy 
▁ the book in the beginning , and he had sworn never to come near the place again . 
▁ xxmaj and yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander , his feet had brought 
▁ him back here of their own accord . xxmaj it was precisely against suicidal impulses of 
▁ this kind that he had hoped to guard himself by opening the diary . xxmaj at the same 
▁ time he noticed that although it was nearly twenty - one hours the shop was still 
▁ open . xxmaj with the feeling that he would be less conspicuous inside than hanging 
▁ about on the pavement , he stepped through the doorway . xxmaj if questioned , he 
▁ could plausibly say that he was trying to buy razor blades . 
▁ xxmaj the proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an unclean 
▁ 53 
▁ but friendly smell . xxmaj he was a man of perhaps sixty , frail and bowed , with a long , 
▁ benevolent nose , and mild eyes distorted by thick spectacles . xxmaj his hair was 
▁ almost white , but his eyebrows were bushy and still black . xxmaj his spectacles , his 
▁ gentle , fussy movements , and the fact that he was wearing an aged jacket of 
▁ black velvet , gave him a vague air of intellectuality , as though he had been some 
▁ kind of literary man , or perhaps a musician . xxmaj his voice was soft , as though faded , 
▁ and his accent less debased than that of the majority of proles . 
▁ ’ i recognized you on the pavement , ’ he said immediately . ’ you ’re the gentleman that bought the young lady ’s keepsake album . xxmaj that was a beautiful bit of 
▁ paper , that was . xxmaj cream- laid , it used to be called . xxmaj there ’s been no paper like 
▁ that made for — oh , i dare say fifty years . ’ xxmaj he peered at xxmaj winston over the top 
▁ of his spectacles . ’ is there anything special i can do for you ? xxmaj or did you just 
▁ want to look round ? ’ 
▁ ’ i was passing , ’ said xxmaj winston vaguely . ’ i just looked in . i do n’t want anything 
▁ in particular . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s just as well , ’ said the other , ’ because i do n’t suppose i could have satisfied you . ’ xxmaj he made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed hand . ’ you see 
▁ how it is ; an empty shop , you might say . xxmaj between you and me , the antique 
▁ trade ’s just about finished . xxmaj no demand any longer , and no stock either . xxmaj furniture , china , glass it ’s all been broken up by degrees . xxmaj and of course the metal 
▁ stuff ’s mostly been melted down . i have n’t seen a brass candlestick in years . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably full , but there was 
▁ almost nothing in it of the slightest value . xxmaj the floorspace was very restricted , 
▁ because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty picture - frames . xxmaj in 
▁ the window there were trays of nuts and bolts , worn - out chisels , penknives with 
▁ broken blades , tarnished watches that did not even pretend to be in going order , 
▁ and other miscellaneous rubbish . xxmaj only on a small table in the corner was there a 
▁ litter of odds and ends — lacquered snuffboxes , agate brooches , and the like — 
▁ which looked as though they might include something interesting . xxmaj as xxmaj winston 
▁ wandered towards the table his eye was caught by a round , smooth thing that 
▁ gleamed softly in the lamplight , and he picked it up . 
▁ xxmaj it was a heavy lump of glass , curved on one side , flat on the other , making 
▁ almost a hemisphere . xxmaj there was a peculiar softness , as of rainwater , in both the 
▁ colour and the texture of the glass . xxmaj at the heart of it , magnified by the curved 
▁ surface , there was a strange , pink , convoluted object that recalled a rose or a 
▁ sea anemone . 
▁ ’ what is it ? ’ said xxmaj winston , fascinated . 
▁ ’ that ’s coral , that is , ’ said the old man . ’ it must have come from the xxmaj indian 
▁ xxmaj ocean . xxmaj they used to kind of embed it in the glass . xxmaj that was n’t made less than 
▁ a hundred years ago . xxmaj more , by the look of it . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s a beautiful thing , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ it is a beautiful thing , ’ said the other appreciatively . ’ but there ’s not many 
▁ that ’d say so nowadays . ’ xxmaj he coughed . ’ now , if it so happened that you wanted 
▁ to buy it , that ’d cost you four dollars . i can remember when a thing like that 
▁ would have fetched eight pounds , and eight pounds was — well , i ca n’t work it 
▁ out , but it was a lot of money . xxmaj but who cares about genuine antiques nowadays 
▁ even the few that ’s left ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing 
▁ into his pocket . xxmaj what appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty 
▁ as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different from the 
▁ 54 
▁ present one . xxmaj the soft , rainwatery glass was not like any glass that he had 
▁ ever seen . xxmaj the thing was doubly attractive because of its apparent uselessness , 
▁ though he could guess that it must once have been intended as a paperweight . 
▁ xxmaj it was very heavy in his pocket , but fortunately it did not make much of a bulge . 
▁ xxmaj it was a queer thing , even a compromising thing , for a xxmaj party member to have 
▁ in his possession . xxmaj anything old , and for that matter anything beautiful , was 
▁ always vaguely suspect . xxmaj the old man had grown noticeably more cheerful after 
▁ receiving the four dollars . xxmaj winston realized that he would have accepted three 
▁ or even two . 
▁ ’ there ’s another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at , ’ he 
▁ said . ’ there ’s not much in it . xxmaj just a few pieces . xxmaj we ’ll do with a light if we ’re 
▁ going upstairs . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he lit another lamp , and , with bowed back , led the way slowly up the steep 
▁ and worn stairs and along a tiny passage , into a room which did not give on the 
▁ street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of chimney - pots . xxmaj winston 
▁ noticed that the furniture was still arranged as though the room were meant to 
▁ be lived in . xxmaj there was a strip of carpet on the floor , a picture or two on the walls , 
▁ and a deep , slatternly arm - chair drawn up to the fireplace . xxmaj an old - fashioned 
▁ glass clock with a twelve - hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece . xxmaj under 
▁ the window , and occupying nearly a quarter of the room , was an enormous bed 
▁ with the mattress still on it . 
▁ ’ we lived here till my wife died , ’ said the old man half apologetically . ’ i ’ m 
▁ selling the furniture off by little and little . xxmaj now that ’s a beautiful mahogany 
▁ bed , or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it . xxmaj but i dare say 
▁ you ’d find it a little bit cumbersome . 
▁ xxmaj he was holdlng the lamp high up , so as to illuminate the whole room , and 
▁ in the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting . xxmaj the thought flitted 
▁ through xxmaj winston ’s mind that it would probably be quite easy to rent the room 
▁ for a few dollars a week , if he dared to take the risk . xxmaj it was a wild , impossible 
▁ notion , to be abandoned as soon as thought of ; but the room had awakened in 
▁ him a sort of nostalgia , a sort of ancestral memory . xxmaj it seemed to him that he 
▁ knew exactly what it felt like to sit in a room like this , in an arm - chair beside 
▁ an open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob ; utterly alone , 
▁ utterly secure , with nobody watching you , no voice pursuing you , no sound 
▁ except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock . 
▁ ’ there ’s no telescreen ! ’ he could not help murmuring . 
▁ ’ ah , ’ said the old man , ’ i never had one of those things . xxmaj too expensive . xxmaj and 
▁ i never seemed to feel the need of it , somehow . xxmaj now that ’s a nice gateleg table 
▁ in the corner there . xxmaj though of course you ’d have to put new hinges on it if you 
▁ wanted to use the flaps . ’ 
▁ xxmaj there was a small bookcase in the other corner , and xxmaj winston had already 
▁ gravitated towards it . xxmaj it contained nothing but rubbish . xxmaj the hunting - down and 
▁ destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in the prole 
▁ quarters as everywhere else . xxmaj it was very unlikely that there existed anywhere in 
▁ xxmaj oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960 . xxmaj the old man , still carrying 
▁ the lamp , was standing in front of a picture in a rosewood frame which hung on 
▁ the other side of the fireplace , opposite the bed . 
▁ ’ now , if you happen to be interested in old prints at all - ’ he began delicately . 
▁ xxmaj winston came across to examine the picture . xxmaj it was a steel engraving of 
▁ an oval building with rectangular windows , and a small tower in front . xxmaj there 
▁ 55 
▁ was a railing running round the building , and at the rear end there was what 
▁ appeared to be a statue . xxmaj winston gazed at it for some moments . xxmaj it seemed 
▁ vaguely familiar , though he did not remember the statue . 
▁ ’ the frame ’s fixed to the wall , ’ said the old man , ’ but i could unscrew it for 
▁ you , i dare say . ’ 
▁ ’ i know that building , ’ said xxmaj winston finally . ’ it ’s a ruin now . xxmaj it ’s in the 
▁ middle of the street outside the xxmaj palace of xxmaj justice . ’ 
▁ ’ that ’s right . xxmaj outside the xxmaj law xxmaj courts . xxmaj it was bombed in — oh , many years 
▁ ago . xxmaj it was a church at one time , xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s xxmaj danes , its name was . ’ xxmaj he smiled 
▁ apologetically , as though conscious of saying something slightly ridiculous , and 
▁ added : ’ oranges and lemons , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s ! ’ 
▁ ’ what ’s that ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ oh-”oranges and lemons , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s . ” xxmaj that was a rhyme 
▁ we had when i was a little boy . xxmaj how it goes on i do n’t remember , but i do know 
▁ it ended up , ” here comes a candle to light you to bed , xxmaj here comes a chopper 
▁ to chop off your head . ” xxmaj it was a kind of a dance . xxmaj they held out their arms for 
▁ you to pass under , and when they came to ” here comes a chopper to chop off 
▁ your head ” they brought their arms down and caught you . xxmaj it was just names of 
▁ churches . xxmaj all the xxmaj london churches were in it — all the principal ones , that is . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged . xxmaj it was 
▁ always difficult to determine the age of a xxmaj london building . xxmaj anything large and 
▁ impressive , if it was reasonably new in appearance , was automatically claimed 
▁ as having been built since the xxmaj revolution , while anything that was obviously 
▁ of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the xxmaj middle xxmaj ages . xxmaj the 
▁ centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any value . xxmaj one 
▁ could not learn history from architecture any more than one could learn it from 
▁ books . xxmaj statues , inscriptions , memorial stones , the names of streets — anything 
▁ that might throw light upon the past had been systematically altered . 
▁ ’ i never knew it had been a church , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ there ’s a lot of them left , really , ’ said the old man , ’ though they ’ ve been 
▁ put to other uses . xxmaj now , how did that rhyme go ? xxmaj ah ! xxmaj i ’ ve got it ! 
▁ ” oranges and lemons , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s , 
▁ xxmaj you owe me three farthings , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s 
▁ — ” there , now , that ’s as far as i can get . 
▁ a farthing , that was a small copper coin , 
▁ looked something like a cent . ’ 
▁ ’ where was xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ st xxmaj martin ’s ? xxmaj that ’s still standing . xxmaj it ’s in xxmaj victory xxmaj square , alongside the 
▁ picture gallery . a building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillars in front , 
▁ and a big flight of steps . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston knew the place well . xxmaj it was a museum used for propaganda displays of various kinds — scale models of rocket bombs and xxmaj floating xxmaj fortresses , 
▁ waxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities , and the like . 
▁ ’ st martin ’s - in - the - fields it used to be called , ’ supplemented the old man , 
▁ ’ though i do n’t recollect any fields anywhere in those parts . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston did not buy the picture . xxmaj it would have been an even more incongruous possession than the glass paperweight , and impossible to carry home , 
▁ unless it were taken out of its frame . xxmaj but he lingered for some minutes more , 
▁ talking to the old man , whose name , he discovered , was not xxmaj weeks - as one might 
▁ have gathered from the inscription over the shop - front — but xxmaj charrington . xxmaj mr 
▁ 56 
▁ xxmaj charrington , it seemed , was a widower aged sixty - three and had inhabited this 
▁ shop for thirty years . xxmaj throughout that time he had been intending to alter the 
▁ name over the window , but had never quite got to the point of doing it . xxmaj all the 
▁ while that they were talking the half - remembered rhyme kept running through 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s head . xxmaj oranges and lemons say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s , xxmaj you owe me 
▁ three farthings , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s ! xxmaj it was curious , but when you said 
▁ it to yourself you had the illusion of actually hearing bells , the bells of a lost 
▁ xxmaj london that still existed somewhere or other , disguised and forgotten . xxmaj from 
▁ one ghostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth . xxmaj yet so 
▁ far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells ringing . 
▁ xxmaj he got away from xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington and went down the stairs alone , so as 
▁ not to let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out of 
▁ the door . xxmaj he had already made up his mind that after a suitable interval — a 
▁ month , say — he would take the risk of visiting the shop again . xxmaj it was perhaps 
▁ not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the xxmaj centre . xxmaj the serious piece 
▁ of folly had been to come back here in the first place , after buying the diary and 
▁ without knowing whether the proprietor of the shop could be trusted . xxmaj however- ! 
▁ xxmaj yes , he thought again , he would come back . xxmaj he would buy further scraps of 
▁ beautiful rubbish . xxmaj he would buy the engraving of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s xxmaj danes , take it 
▁ out of its frame , and carry it home concealed under the jacket of his overalls . 
▁ xxmaj he would drag the rest of that poem out of xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s memory . xxmaj even 
▁ the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed momentarily through 
▁ his mind again . xxmaj for perhaps five seconds exaltation made him careless , and 
▁ he stepped out on to the pavement without so much as a preliminary glance 
▁ through the window . xxmaj he had even started humming to an improvised tune 
▁ xxmaj oranges and lemons , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s , xxmaj you owe me three farthings , say the 
▁ xxmaj suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water . a figure 
▁ in blue overalls was coming down the pavement , not ten metres away . xxmaj it was 
▁ the girl from the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department , the girl with dark hair . xxmaj the light was 
▁ failing , but there was no difficulty in recognizing her . xxmaj she looked him straight 
▁ in the face , then walked quickly on as though she had not seen him . 
▁ xxmaj for a few seconds xxmaj winston was too paralysed to move . xxmaj then he turned to 
▁ the right and walked heavily away , not noticing for the moment that he was 
▁ going in the wrong direction . xxmaj at any rate , one question was settled . xxmaj there was 
▁ no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him . xxmaj she must have followed 
▁ him here , because it was not credible that by pure chance she should have 
▁ happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure backstreet , 
▁ kilometres distant from any quarter where xxmaj party members lived . xxmaj it was too 
▁ great a coincidence . xxmaj whether she was really an agent of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , 
▁ or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness , hardly mattered . xxmaj it was 
▁ enough that she was watching him . xxmaj probably she had seen him go into the pub 
▁ as well . 
▁ xxmaj it was an effort to walk . xxmaj the lump of glass in his pocket banged against his 
▁ thigh at each step , and he was half minded to take it out and throw it away . 
▁ xxmaj the worst thing was the pain in his belly . xxmaj for a couple of minutes he had the 
▁ feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon . xxmaj but there would 
▁ be no public lavatories in a quarter like this . xxmaj then the spasm passed , leaving a 
▁ dull ache behind . 
▁ xxmaj the street was a blind alley . xxmaj winston halted , stood for several seconds 
▁ 57 
▁ wondering vaguely what to do , then turned round and began to retrace his 
▁ steps . xxmaj as he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him three 
▁ minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her . xxmaj he could 
▁ keep on her track till they were in some quiet place , and then smash her skull 
▁ in with a cobblestone . xxmaj the piece of glass in his pocket would be heavy enough 
▁ for the job . xxmaj but he abandoned the idea immediately , because even the thought 
▁ of making any physical effort was unbearable . xxmaj he could not run , he could not 
▁ strike a blow . xxmaj besides , she was young and lusty and would defend herself . xxmaj he 
▁ thought also of hurrying to the xxmaj community xxmaj centre and staying there till the 
▁ place closed , so as to establish a partial alibi for the evening . xxmaj but that too was 
▁ impossible . a deadly lassitude had taken hold of him . xxmaj all he wanted was to get 
▁ home quickly and then sit down and be quiet . 
▁ xxmaj it was after twenty - two hours when he got back to the flat . xxmaj the lights would 
▁ be switched off at the main at twenty - three thirty . xxmaj he went into the kitchen and 
▁ swallowed nearly a teacupful of xxmaj victory xxmaj gin . xxmaj then he went to the table in the 
▁ alcove , sat down , and took the diary out of the drawer . xxmaj but he did not open 
▁ it at once . xxmaj from the telescreen a brassy female voice was squalling a patriotic 
▁ song . xxmaj he sat staring at the marbled cover of the book , trying without success 
▁ to shut the voice out of his consciousness . 
▁ xxmaj it was at night that they came for you , always at night . xxmaj the proper thing 
▁ was to kill yourself before they got you . xxmaj undoubtedly some people did so . xxmaj many 
▁ of the disappearances were actually suicides . xxmaj but it needed desperate courage 
▁ to kill yourself in a world where firearms , or any quick and certain poison , 
▁ were completely unprocurable . xxmaj he thought with a kind of astonishment of the 
▁ biological uselessness of pain and fear , the treachery of the human body which 
▁ always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment when a special effort is needed . 
▁ xxmaj he might have silenced the dark - haired girl if only he had acted quickly enough : 
▁ but precisely because of the extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act . 
▁ xxmaj it struck him that in moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external 
▁ enemy , but always against one ’s own body . xxmaj even now , in spite of the gin , the 
▁ dull ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible . xxmaj and it is the same , 
▁ he perceived , in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations . xxmaj on the battlefield , 
▁ in the torture chamber , on a sinking ship , the issues that you are fighting for 
▁ are always forgotten , because the body swells up until it fills the universe , and 
▁ even when you are not paralysed by fright or screaming with pain , life is a 
▁ moment - to - moment struggle against hunger or cold or sleeplessness , against a 
▁ sour stomach or an aching tooth . 
▁ xxmaj he opened the diary . xxmaj it was important to write something down . xxmaj the woman 
▁ on the telescreen had started a new song . xxmaj her voice seemed to stick into his 
▁ brain like jagged splinters of glass . xxmaj he tried to think of o’brien , for whom , or 
▁ to whom , the diary was written , but instead he began thinking of the things 
▁ that would happen to him after the xxmaj thought xxmaj police took him away . xxmaj it would 
▁ not matter if they killed you at once . xxmaj to be killed was what you expected . xxmaj but 
▁ before death ( nobody spoke of such things , yet everybody knew of them ) there 
▁ was the routine of confession that had to be gone through : the grovelling on the 
▁ floor and screaming for mercy , the crack of broken bones , the smashed teeth , 
▁ and bloody clots of hair . 
▁ xxmaj why did you have to endure it , since the end was always the same ? xxmaj why was 
▁ it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life ? xxmaj nobody ever escaped 
▁ detection , and nobody ever failed to confess . xxmaj when once you had succumbed to 
▁ 58 
▁ thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be dead . xxmaj why then 
▁ did that horror , which altered nothing , have to lie embedded in future time ? 
▁ xxmaj he tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of 
▁ o’brien . ’ we shall meet in the place where there is no darkness , ’ o’brien had 
▁ said to him . xxmaj he knew what it meant , or thought he knew . xxmaj the place where 
▁ there is no darkness was the imagined future , which one would never see , but 
▁ which , by foreknowledge , one could mystically share in . xxmaj but with the voice 
▁ from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train of thought 
▁ further . xxmaj he put a cigarette in his mouth . xxmaj half the tobacco promptly fell out on 
▁ to his tongue , a bitter dust which was difficult to spit out again . xxmaj the face of xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother swam into his mind , displacing that of o’brien . xxmaj just as he had done 
▁ a few days earlier , he slid a coin out of his pocket and looked at it . xxmaj the face 
▁ gazed up at him , heavy , calm , protecting : but what kind of smile was hidden 
▁ beneath the dark moustache ? xxmaj like a leaden knell the words came back at him : 
▁ xxup war xxup is xxup peace 
▁ xxup freedom xxup is xxup slavery 
▁ xxup ignorance xxup is xxup strength 
▁ 59 
▁ xxmaj chapter 9 
▁ xxmaj it was the middle of the morning , and xxmaj winston had left the cubicle to go to the 
▁ lavatory . 
▁ a solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the long , 
▁ brightly - lit corridor . xxmaj it was the girl with dark hair . xxmaj four days had gone past 
▁ since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk - shop . xxmaj as she came 
▁ nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling , not noticeable at a distance 
▁ because it was of the same colour as her overalls . xxmaj probably she had crushed her 
▁ hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes on which the plots of 
▁ novels were ’ roughed in ’ . xxmaj it was a common accident in the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department . 
▁ xxmaj they were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost 
▁ flat on her face . a sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her . xxmaj she must have 
▁ fallen right on the injured arm . xxmaj winston stopped short . xxmaj the girl had risen to 
▁ her knees . xxmaj her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her mouth 
▁ stood out redder than ever . xxmaj her eyes were fixed on his , with an appealing 
▁ expression that looked more like fear than pain . 
▁ a curious emotion stirred in xxmaj winston ’s heart . xxmaj in front of him was an enemy 
▁ who was trying to kill him : in front of him , also , was a human creature , in pain 
▁ and perhaps with a broken bone . xxmaj already he had instinctively started forward 
▁ to help her . xxmaj in the moment when he had seen her fall on the bandaged arm , it 
▁ had been as though he felt the pain in his own body . 
▁ ’ you ’re hurt ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ it ’s nothing . xxmaj my arm . xxmaj it ’ll be all right in a second . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she spoke as though her heart were fluttering . xxmaj she had certainly turned very 
▁ pale . 
▁ ’ you have n’t broken anything ? ’ 
▁ ’ no , xxmaj i ’ m all right . xxmaj it hurt for a moment , that ’s all . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she held out her free hand to him , and he helped her up . xxmaj she had regained 
▁ some of her colour , and appeared very much better . 
▁ ’ it ’s nothing , ’ she repeated shortly . ’ i only gave my wrist a bit of a bang . 
▁ xxmaj thanks , comrade ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj and with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been going , as 
▁ briskly as though it had really been nothing . xxmaj the whole incident could not have 
▁ taken as much as half a minute . xxmaj not to let one ’s feelings appear in one ’s face was 
▁ a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct , and in any case they had been 
▁ standing straight in front of a telescreen when the thing happened . xxmaj nevertheless 
▁ it had been very difficult not to betray a momentary surprise , for in the two 
▁ or three seconds while he was helping her up the girl had slipped something 
▁ 60 
▁ into his hand . xxmaj there was no question that she had done it intentionally . xxmaj it was 
▁ something small and flat . xxmaj as he passed through the lavatory door he transferred 
▁ it to his pocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers . xxmaj it was a scrap of paper 
▁ folded into a square . 
▁ xxmaj while he stood at the urinal he managed , with a little more fingering , to 
▁ get it unfolded . xxmaj obviously there must be a message of some kind written on 
▁ it . xxmaj for a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water - closets and 
▁ read it at once . xxmaj but that would be shocking folly , as he well knew . xxmaj there was 
▁ no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens were watched 
▁ continuously . 
▁ xxmaj he went back to his cubicle , sat down , threw the fragment of paper casually 
▁ among the other papers on the desk , put on his spectacles and hitched the 
▁ speakwrite towards him . ’ five minutes , ’ he told himself , ’ five minutes at the very 
▁ least ! ’ xxmaj his heart bumped in his breast with frightening loudness . xxmaj fortunately 
▁ the piece of work he was engaged on was mere routine , the rectification of a 
▁ long list of figures , not needing close attention . 
▁ xxmaj whatever was written on the paper , it must have some kind of political 
▁ meaning . xxmaj so far as he could see there were two possibilities . xxmaj one , much the 
▁ more likely , was that the girl was an agent of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , just as he had 
▁ feared . xxmaj he did not know why the xxmaj thought xxmaj police should choose to deliver their 
▁ messages in such a fashion , but perhaps they had their reasons . xxmaj the thing that 
▁ was written on the paper might be a threat , a summons , an order to commit 
▁ suicide , a trap of some description . xxmaj but there was another , wilder possibility 
▁ that kept raising its head , though he tried vainly to suppress it . xxmaj this was , that 
▁ the message did not come from the xxmaj thought xxmaj police at all , but from some kind of 
▁ underground organization . xxmaj perhaps the xxmaj brotherhood existed after all ! xxmaj perhaps 
▁ the girl was part of it ! xxmaj no doubt the idea was absurd , but it had sprung into his 
▁ mind in the very instant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand . xxmaj it was not till a 
▁ couple of minutes later that the other , more probable explanation had occurred 
▁ to him . xxmaj and even now , though his intellect told him that the message probably 
▁ meant death — still , that was not what he believed , and the unreasonable hope 
▁ persisted , and his heart banged , and it was with difficulty that he kept his voice 
▁ from trembling as he murmured his figures into the speakwrite . 
▁ xxmaj he rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic 
▁ tube . xxmaj eight minutes had gone by . xxmaj he re - adjusted his spectacles on his nose , 
▁ sighed , and drew the next batch of work towards him , with the scrap of paper 
▁ on top of it . xxmaj he flattened it out . xxmaj on it was written , in a large unformed 
▁ handwriting : 
▁ i love you . 
▁ xxmaj for several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating thing 
▁ into the memory hole . xxmaj when he did so , although he knew very well the danger 
▁ of showing too much interest , he could not resist reading it once again , just to 
▁ make sure that the words were really there . 
▁ xxmaj for the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work . xxmaj what was even 
▁ worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the need to 
▁ conceal his agitation from the telescreen . xxmaj he felt as though a fire were burning 
▁ in his belly . xxmaj lunch in the hot , crowded , noise - filled canteen was torment . xxmaj he 
▁ had hoped to be alone for a little while during the lunch hour , but as bad luck 
▁ would have it the imbecile xxmaj parsons flopped down beside him , the tang of his 
▁ sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of stew , and kept up a stream of talk 
▁ 61 
▁ about the preparations for xxmaj hate xxmaj week . xxmaj he was particularly enthusiastic about 
▁ a papier - mˆach´e ; model of xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s head , two metres wide , which was being 
▁ made for the occasion by his daughter ’s troop of xxmaj spies . xxmaj the irritating thing was 
▁ that in the racket of voices xxmaj winston could hardly hear what xxmaj parsons was saying , 
▁ and was constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated . xxmaj just 
▁ once he caught a glimpse of the girl , at a table with two other girls at the far 
▁ end of the room . xxmaj she appeared not to have seen him , and he did not look in 
▁ that direction again . 
▁ xxmaj the afternoon was more bearable . xxmaj immediately after lunch there arrived a 
▁ delicate , difficult piece of work which would take several hours and necessitated 
▁ putting everything else aside . xxmaj it consisted in falsifying a series of production 
▁ reports of two years ago , in such a way as to cast discredit on a prominent 
▁ member of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , who was now under a cloud . xxmaj this was the kind 
▁ of thing that xxmaj winston was good at , and for more than two hours he succeeded 
▁ in shutting the girl out of his mind altogether . xxmaj then the memory of her face 
▁ came back , and with it a raging , intolerable desire to be alone . xxmaj until he could 
▁ be alone it was impossible to think this new development out . xxmaj tonight was 
▁ one of his nights at the xxmaj community xxmaj centre . xxmaj he wolfed another tasteless meal 
▁ in the canteen , hurried off to the xxmaj centre , took part in the solemn foolery of a 
▁ ’ discussion group ’ , played two games of table tennis , swallowed several glasses 
▁ of gin , and sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled ’ ingsoc in relation to 
▁ chess ’ . xxmaj his soul writhed with boredom , but for once he had had no impulse to 
▁ shirk his evening at the xxmaj centre . xxmaj at the sight of the words i love you the desire to 
▁ stay alive had welled up in him , and the taking of minor risks suddenly seemed 
▁ stupid . xxmaj it was not till twenty - three hours , when he was home and in bed — in 
▁ the darkness , where you were safe even from the telescreen so long as you kept 
▁ silent — that he was able to think continuously . 
▁ xxmaj it was a physical problem that had to be solved : how to get in touch with 
▁ the girl and arrange a meeting . xxmaj he did not consider any longer the possibility 
▁ that she might be laying some kind of trap for him . xxmaj he knew that it was 
▁ not so , because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed him the note . 
▁ xxmaj obviously she had been frightened out of her wits , as well she might be . xxmaj nor 
▁ did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his mind . xxmaj only five nights ago 
▁ he had contemplated smashing her skull in with a cobblestone , but that was 
▁ of no importance . xxmaj he thought of her naked , youthful body , as he had seen it 
▁ in his dream . xxmaj he had imagined her a fool like all the rest of them , her head 
▁ stuffed with lies and hatred , her belly full of ice . a kind of fever seized him at 
▁ the thought that he might lose her , the white youthful body might slip away 
▁ from him ! xxmaj what he feared more than anything else was that she would simply 
▁ change her mind if he did not get in touch with her quickly . xxmaj but the physical 
▁ difficulty of meeting was enormous . xxmaj it was like trying to make a move at chess 
▁ when you were already mated . xxmaj whichever way you turned , the telescreen faced 
▁ you . xxmaj actually , all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred 
▁ to him within five minutes of reading the note ; but now , with time to think , 
▁ he went over them one by one , as though laying out a row of instruments on a 
▁ table . 
▁ xxmaj obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not 
▁ be repeated . xxmaj if she had worked in the xxmaj records xxmaj department it might have been 
▁ comparatively simple , but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts in the 
▁ building the xxmaj fiction xxmaj departrnent lay , and he had no pretext for going there . xxmaj if 
▁ 62 
▁ he had known where she lived , and at what time she left work , he could have 
▁ contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home ; but to try to follow her 
▁ home was not safe , because it would mean loitering about outside the xxmaj ministry , 
▁ which was bound to be noticed . xxmaj as for sending a letter through the mails , it 
▁ was out of the question . xxmaj by a routine that was not even secret , all letters were 
▁ opened in transit . xxmaj actually , few people ever wrote letters . xxmaj for the messages 
▁ that it was occasionally necessary to send , there were printed postcards with 
▁ long lists of phrases , and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable . xxmaj in any 
▁ case he did not know the girl ’s name , let alone her address . xxmaj finally he decided 
▁ that the safest place was the canteen . xxmaj if he could get her at a table by herself , 
▁ somewhere in the middle of the room , not too near the telescreens , and with a 
▁ sufficient buzz of conversation all round — if these conditions endured for , say , 
▁ thirty seconds , it might be possible to exchange a few words . 
▁ xxmaj for a week after this , life was like a restless dream . xxmaj on the next day she did 
▁ not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it , the whistle having already 
▁ blown . xxmaj presumably she had been changed on to a later shift . xxmaj they passed each 
▁ other without a glance . xxmaj on the day after that she was in the canteen at the usual 
▁ time , but with three other girls and immediately under a telescreen . xxmaj then for 
▁ three dreadful days she did not appear at all . xxmaj his whole mind and body seemed 
▁ to be afflicted with an unbearable sensitivity , a sort of transparency , which made 
▁ every movement , every sound , every contact , every word that he had to speak 
▁ or listen to , an agony . xxmaj even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her 
▁ image . xxmaj he did not touch the diary during those days . xxmaj if there was any relief , it 
▁ was in his work , in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at 
▁ a stretch . xxmaj he had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her . xxmaj there 
▁ was no enquiry he could make . xxmaj she might have been vaporized , she might have 
▁ committed suicide , she might have been transferred to the other end of xxmaj oceania : 
▁ worst and likeliest of all , she might simply have changed her mind and decided 
▁ to avoid him . 
▁ xxmaj the next day she reappeared . xxmaj her arm was out of the sling and she had 
▁ a band of sticking - plaster round her wrist . xxmaj the relief of seeing her was so 
▁ great that he could not resist staring directly at her for several seconds . xxmaj on 
▁ the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her . xxmaj when he came 
▁ into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the wall , and was 
▁ quite alone . xxmaj it was early , and the place was not very full . xxmaj the queue edged 
▁ forward till xxmaj winston was almost at the counter , then was held up for two minutes 
▁ because someone in front was complaining that he had not received his tablet 
▁ of saccharine . xxmaj but the girl was still alone when xxmaj winston secured his tray and 
▁ began to make for her table . xxmaj he walked casually towards her , his eyes searching 
▁ for a place at some table beyond her . xxmaj she was perhaps three metres away from 
▁ him . xxmaj another two seconds would do it . xxmaj then a voice behind him called , ’ smith ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj he pretended not to hear . ’ smith ! ’ repeated the voice , more loudly . xxmaj it was no 
▁ use . xxmaj he turned round . a blond - headed , silly - faced young man named xxmaj wilsher , 
▁ whom he barely knew , was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his 
▁ table . xxmaj it was not safe to refuse . xxmaj after having been recognized , he could not 
▁ go and sit at a table with an unattended girl . xxmaj it was too noticeable . xxmaj he sat 
▁ down with a friendly smile . xxmaj the silly blond face beamed into his . xxmaj winston had 
▁ a hallucination of himself smashing a pick - axe right into the middle of it . xxmaj the 
▁ girl ’s table filled up a few minutes later . 
▁ xxmaj but she must have seen him coming towards her , and perhaps she would 
▁ 63 
▁ take the hint . xxmaj next day he took care to arrive early . xxmaj surely enough , she was 
▁ at a table in about the same place , and again alone . xxmaj the person immediately 
▁ ahead of him in the queue was a small , swiftly - moving , beetle - like man with a 
▁ flat face and tiny , suspicious eyes . xxmaj as xxmaj winston turned away from the counter 
▁ with his tray , he saw that the little man was making straight for the girl ’s table . 
▁ xxmaj his hopes sank again . xxmaj there was a vacant place at a table further away , but 
▁ something in the little man ’s appearance suggested that he would be sufficiently 
▁ attentive to his own comfort to choose the emptiest table . xxmaj with ice at his heart 
▁ xxmaj winston followed . xxmaj it was no use unless he could get the girl alone . xxmaj at this 
▁ moment there was a tremendous crash . xxmaj the little man was sprawling on all 
▁ fours , his tray had gone flying , two streams of soup and coffee were flowing 
▁ across the floor . xxmaj he started to his feet with a malignant glance at xxmaj winston , 
▁ whom he evidently suspected of having tripped him up . xxmaj but it was all right . 
▁ xxmaj five seconds later , with a thundering heart , xxmaj winston was sitting at the girl ’s 
▁ table . 
▁ xxmaj he did not look at her . xxmaj he unpacked his tray and promptly began eating . xxmaj it 
▁ was all - important to speak at once , before anyone else came , but now a terrible 
▁ fear had taken possession of him . a week had gone by since she had first 
▁ approached him . xxmaj she would have changed her mind , she must have changed 
▁ her mind ! xxmaj it was impossible that this affair should end successfully ; such things 
▁ did not happen in real life . xxmaj he might have flinched altogether from speaking if 
▁ at this moment he had not seen xxmaj ampleforth , the hairy - eared poet , wandering 
▁ limply round the room with a tray , looking for a place to sit down . xxmaj in his vague 
▁ way xxmaj ampleforth was attached to xxmaj winston , and would certainly sit down at his 
▁ table if he caught sight of him . xxmaj there was perhaps a minute in which to act . 
▁ xxmaj both xxmaj winston and the girl were eating steadily . xxmaj the stuff they were eating was 
▁ a thin stew , actually a soup , of haricot beans . xxmaj in a low murmur xxmaj winston began 
▁ speaking . xxmaj neither of them looked up ; steadily they spooned the watery stuff 
▁ into their mouths , and between spoonfuls exchanged the few necessary words 
▁ in low expressionless voices . 
▁ ’ what time do you leave work ? ’ 
▁ ’ eighteen - thirty . ’ 
▁ ’ where can we meet ? ’ 
▁ ’ victory xxmaj square , near the monument . 
▁ ’ it ’s full of telescreens . ’ 
▁ ’ it does n’t matter if there ’s a crowd . ’ 
▁ ’ any signal ? ’ 
▁ ’ no . xxmaj do n’t come up to me until you see me among a lot of people . xxmaj and 
▁ do n’t look at me . xxmaj just keep somewhere near me . ’ 
▁ ’ what time ? ’ 
▁ ’ nineteen hours . ’ 
▁ ’ all right . ’ 
▁ xxmaj ampleforth failed to see xxmaj winston and sat down at another table . xxmaj they did 
▁ not speak again , and , so far as it was possible for two people sitting on opposite 
▁ sides of the same table , they did not look at one another . xxmaj the girl finished her 
▁ lunch quickly and made off , while xxmaj winston stayed to smoke a cigarette . 
▁ xxmaj winston was in xxmaj victory xxmaj square before the appointed time . xxmaj he wandered 
▁ round the base of the enormous fluted column , at the top of which xxmaj big xxmaj brother ’s 
▁ statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the xxmaj eurasian 
▁ aeroplanes ( the xxmaj eastasian aeroplanes , it had been , a few years ago ) in the xxmaj battle 
▁ 64 
▁ of xxmaj airstrip xxmaj one . xxmaj in the street in front of it there was a statue of a man on 
▁ horseback which was supposed to represent xxmaj oliver xxmaj cromwell . xxmaj at five minutes 
▁ past the hour the girl had still not appeared . xxmaj again the terrible fear seized upon 
▁ xxmaj winston . xxmaj she was not coming , she had changed her mind ! xxmaj he walked slowly 
▁ up to the north side of the square and got a sort of pale - coloured pleasure from 
▁ identifying xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s xxmaj church , whose bells , when it had bells , had chimed 
▁ ’ you owe me three farthings . ’ xxmaj then he saw the girl standing at the base of 
▁ the monument , reading or pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the 
▁ column . xxmaj it was not safe to go near her until some more people had accumulated . 
▁ xxmaj there were telescreens all round the pediment . xxmaj but at this moment there was 
▁ a din of shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly everyone seemed to be running across the square . xxmaj the girl nipped 
▁ nimbly round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush . 
▁ xxmaj winston followed . xxmaj as he ran , he gathered from some shouted remarks that a 
▁ convoy of xxmaj eurasian prisoners was passing . 
▁ xxmaj already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square . 
▁ xxmaj winston , at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer edge 
▁ of any kind of scrimmage , shoved , butted , squirmed his way forward into the 
▁ heart of the crowd . xxmaj soon he was within arm ’s length of the girl , but the way 
▁ was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous woman , 
▁ presumably his wife , who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of flesh . xxmaj winston wriggled himself sideways , and with a violent lunge managed to drive his 
▁ shoulder between them . xxmaj for a moment it felt as though his entrails were being 
▁ ground to pulp between the two muscular hips , then he had broken through , 
▁ sweating a little . xxmaj he was next to the girl . xxmaj they were shoulder to shoulder , both 
▁ staring fixedly in front of them . 
▁ a long line of trucks , with wooden - faced guards armed with sub - machine 
▁ guns standing upright in each corner , was passing slowly down the street . xxmaj in 
▁ the trucks little yellow men in shabby greenish uniforms were squatting , jammed 
▁ close together . xxmaj their sad , xxmaj mongolian faces gazed out over the sides of the trucks 
▁ utterly incurious . xxmaj occasionally when a truck jolted there was a clank - clank of 
▁ metal : all the prisoners were wearing leg - irons . xxmaj truck - load after truck - load of 
▁ the sad faces passed . xxmaj winston knew they were there but he saw them only 
▁ intermittently . xxmaj the girl ’s shoulder , and her arm right down to the elbow , were 
▁ pressed against his . xxmaj her cheek was almost near enough for him to feel its warmth . 
▁ xxmaj she had immediately taken charge of the situation , just as she had done in the 
▁ canteen . xxmaj she began speaking in the same expressionless voice as before , with 
▁ lips barely moving , a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the 
▁ rumbling of the trucks . 
▁ ’ can you hear me ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ can you get xxmaj sunday afternoon off ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ then listen carefully . xxmaj you ’ll have to remember this . xxmaj go to xxmaj paddington 
▁ xxmaj station- ’ 
▁ xxmaj with a sort of military precision that astonished him , she outlined the route 
▁ that he was to follow . a half - hour railway journey ; turn left outside the station ; 
▁ two kilometres along the road : a gate with the top bar missing ; a path across a 
▁ field ; a grass - grown lane ; a track between bushes ; a dead tree with moss on it . 
▁ xxmaj it was as though she had a map inside her head . ’ can you remember all that ? ’ 
▁ 65 
▁ she murmured finally . 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you turn left , then right , then left again . xxmaj and the gate ’s got no top bar . ’ 
▁ ’ yes . xxmaj what time ? ’ 
▁ ’ about fifteen . xxmaj you may have to wait . xxmaj i ’ll get there by another way . xxmaj are 
▁ you sure you remember everything ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ then get away from me as quick as you can . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she need not have told him that . xxmaj but for the moment they could not extricate themselves from the crowd . xxmaj the trucks were still filing post , the people 
▁ still insatiably gaping . xxmaj at the start there had been a few boos and hisses , but 
▁ it came only from the xxmaj party members among the crowd , and had soon stopped . 
▁ xxmaj the prevailing emotion was simply curiosity . xxmaj foreigners , whether from xxmaj eurasia or from xxmaj eastasia , were a kind of strange animal . xxmaj one literally never saw 
▁ them except in the guise of prisoners , and even as prisoners one never got more 
▁ than a momentary glimpse of them . xxmaj nor did one know what became of them , 
▁ apart from the few who were hanged as war - criminals : te others simply vanished , presumably into forced - labour camps . xxmaj the round xxmaj mogol faces had given 
▁ way to faces of a more xxmaj european type , dirty , bearded and exhausted . xxmaj from 
▁ over scrubby cheekbones eyes looked into xxmaj winston ’s , sometimes with strange 
▁ intensity , and flashed away again . xxmaj the convoy was drawing to an end . xxmaj in the 
▁ last truck he could see an aged man , his face a mass of grizzled hair , standing 
▁ upright with wrists crossed in front of him , as though he were used to having 
▁ them bound together . xxmaj it was almost time for xxmaj winston and the girl to part . xxmaj but 
▁ at the last moment , while the crowd still hemmed them in , her hand felt for his 
▁ and gave it a fleeting squeeze . 
▁ xxmaj it could not have been ten seconds , and yet it seemed a long time that their 
▁ hands were clasped together . xxmaj he had time to learn every detail of her hand . 
▁ xxmaj he explored the long fingers , the shapely nails , the work - hardened palm with 
▁ its row of callouses , the smooth flesh under the wrist . xxmaj merely from feeling it he 
▁ would have known it by sight . xxmaj in the same instant it occurred to him that he 
▁ did not know what colour the girl ’s eyes were . xxmaj they were probably brown , but 
▁ people with dark hair sometimes had blue eyes . xxmaj to turn his head and look at 
▁ her would have been inconceivable folly . xxmaj with hands locked together , invisible 
▁ among the press of bodies , they stared steadily in front of them , and instead of 
▁ the eyes of the girl , the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully at xxmaj winston 
▁ out of nests of hair . 
▁ 66 
▁ xxmaj chapter 10 
▁ xxmaj winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade , stepping 
▁ out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted . xxmaj under the trees to the left 
▁ of him the ground was misty with bluebells . xxmaj the air seemed to kiss one ’s skin . 
▁ xxmaj it was the second of xxmaj may . xxmaj from somewhere deeper in the heart of the wood 
▁ came the droning of ring doves . 
▁ xxmaj he was a bit early . xxmaj there had been no difficulties about the journey , and 
▁ the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he would 
▁ normally have been . xxmaj presumably she could be trusted to find a safe place . xxmaj in 
▁ general you could not assume that you were much safer in the country than in 
▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj there were no telescreens , of course , but there was always the danger 
▁ of concealed microphones by which your voice might be picked up and recognized ; besides , it was not easy to make a journey by yourself without attracting 
▁ attention . xxmaj for distances of less than 100 kilometres it was not necessary to get 
▁ your passport endorsed , but sometimes there were patrols hanging about the 
▁ railway stations , who examined the papers of any xxmaj party member they found 
▁ there and asked awkward questions . xxmaj however , no patrols had appeared , and on 
▁ the walk from the station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that 
▁ he was not being followed . xxmaj the train was full of proles , in holiday mood because 
▁ of the summery weather . xxmaj the wooden - seated carriage in which he travelled was 
▁ filled to overflowing by a single enormous family . ranging from a toothless 
▁ great - grandmother to a month - old baby , going out to spend an afternoon with 
▁ ’ in - laws ’ in the country , and , as they freely explained to xxmaj winston , to get hold 
▁ of a little blackmarket butter . 
▁ xxmaj the lane widened , and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him 
▁ of , a mere cattle - track which plunged between the bushes . xxmaj he had no watch , 
▁ but it could not be fifteen yet . xxmaj the bluebells were so thick underfoot that it was 
▁ impossible not to tread on them . xxmaj he knelt down and began picking some partly 
▁ to pass the time away , but also from a vague idea that he would like to have a 
▁ bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they met . xxmaj he had got together a big 
▁ bunch and was smelling their faint sickly scent when a sound at his back froze 
▁ him , the unmistakable crackle of a foot on twigs . xxmaj he went on picking bluebells . 
▁ xxmaj it was the best thing to do . xxmaj it might be the girl , or he might have been followed 
▁ after all . xxmaj to look round was to show guilt . xxmaj he picked another and another . a 
▁ hand fell lightly on his shoulder . 
▁ xxmaj he looked up . xxmaj it was the girl . xxmaj she shook her head , evidently as a warning 
▁ that he must keep silent , then parted the bushes and quickly led the way along 
▁ the narrow track into the wood . xxmaj obviously she had been that way before , for 
▁ 67 
▁ she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit . xxmaj winston followed , still clasping 
▁ his bunch of flowers . xxmaj his first feeling was relief , but as he watched the strong 
▁ slender body moving in front of him , with the scarlet sash that was just tight 
▁ enough to bring out the curve of her hips , the sense of his own inferiority was 
▁ heavy upon him . xxmaj even now it seemed quite likely that when she turned round 
▁ and looked at him she would draw back after all . xxmaj the sweetness of the air and 
▁ the greenness of the leaves daunted him . xxmaj already on the walk from the station 
▁ the xxmaj may sunshine had made him feel dirty and etiolated , a creature of indoors , 
▁ with the sooty dust of xxmaj london in the pores of his skin . xxmaj it occurred to him that 
▁ till now she had probably never seen him in broad daylight in the open . xxmaj they 
▁ came to the fallen tree that she had spoken of . xxmaj the girl hopped over and forced 
▁ apart the bushes , in which there did not seem to be an opening . xxmaj when xxmaj winston 
▁ followed her , he found that they were in a natural clearing , a tiny grassy knoll 
▁ surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely . xxmaj the girl stopped and 
▁ turned . 
▁ ’ here we are , ’ she said . 
▁ xxmaj he was facing her at several paces ’ distance . xxmaj as yet he did not dare move 
▁ nearer to her . 
▁ ’ i did n’t want to say anything in the lane , ’ she went on , ’ in case there ’s a 
▁ mike hidden there . i do n’t suppose there is , but there could be . xxmaj there ’s always 
▁ the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice . xxmaj we ’re all right here . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he still had not the courage to approach her . ’ we ’re all right here ? ’ he 
▁ repeated stupidly . 
▁ ’ yes . xxmaj look at the trees . ’ xxmaj they were small ashes , which at some time had 
▁ been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles , none of them 
▁ thicker than one ’s wrist . ’ there ’s nothing big enough to hide a mike in . xxmaj besides , 
▁ xxmaj i ’ ve been here before . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were only making conversation . xxmaj he had managed to move closer to her 
▁ now . xxmaj she stood before him very upright , with a smile on her face that looked 
▁ faintly ironical , as though she were wondering why he was so slow to act . xxmaj the 
▁ bluebells had cascaded on to the ground . xxmaj they seemed to have fallen of their 
▁ own accord . xxmaj he took her hand . 
▁ ’ would you believe , ’ he said , ’ that till this moment i did n’t know what colour 
▁ your eyes were ? ’ xxmaj they were brown , he noted , a rather light shade of brown , with 
▁ dark lashes . ’ now that you ’ ve seen what xxmaj i ’ m really like , can you still bear to 
▁ look at me ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , easily . ’ 
▁ ’ i ’ m thirty - nine years old . xxmaj i ’ ve got a wife that i ca n’t get rid of . xxmaj i ’ ve got 
▁ varicose veins . xxmaj i ’ ve got five false teeth . ’ 
▁ ’ i could n’t care less , ’ said the girl . 
▁ xxmaj the next moment , it was hard to say by whose act , she was in his his arms . 
▁ xxmaj at the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity . xxmaj the youthful body 
▁ was strained against his own , the mass of dark hair was against his face , and 
▁ yes ! actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the wide red mouth . 
▁ xxmaj she had clasped her arms about his neck , she was calling him darling , precious 
▁ one , loved one . xxmaj he had pulled her down on to the ground , she was utterly 
▁ unresisting , he could do what he liked with her . xxmaj but the truth was that he had 
▁ no physical sensation , except that of mere contact . xxmaj all he felt was incredulity 
▁ and pride . xxmaj he was glad that this was happening , but he had no physical desire . 
▁ xxmaj it was too soon , her youth and prettiness had frightened him , he was too much 
▁ 68 
▁ used to living without women — he did not know the reason . xxmaj the girl picked 
▁ herself up and pulled a bluebell out of her hair . xxmaj she sat against him , putting 
▁ her arm round his waist . 
▁ ’ never mind , dear . xxmaj there ’s no hurry . xxmaj we ’ ve got the whole afternoon . xxmaj is n’t 
▁ this a splendid hide - out ? i found it when i got lost once on a community hike . 
▁ xxmaj if anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away . ’ 
▁ ’ what is your name ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ julia . i know yours . xxmaj it ’s xxmaj winston — xxmaj winston xxmaj smith . ’ 
▁ ’ how did you find that out ? ’ 
▁ ’ i expect xxmaj i ’ m better at finding things out than you are , dear . xxmaj tell me , what 
▁ did you think of me before that day i gave you the note ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her . xxmaj it was even a sort of 
▁ love - offering to start off by telling the worst . 
▁ ’ i hated the sight of you , ’ he said . ’ i wanted to rape you and then murder you 
▁ afterwards . xxmaj two weeks ago i thought seriously of smashing your head in with 
▁ a cobblestone . xxmaj if you really want to know , i imagined that you had something 
▁ to do with the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the girl laughed delightedly , evidently taking this as a tribute to the excellence of her disguise . 
▁ ’ not the xxmaj thought xxmaj police ! xxmaj you did n’t honestly think that ? ’ 
▁ ’ well , perhaps not exactly that . xxmaj but from your general appearance — merely 
▁ because you ’re young and fresh and healthy , you understand — i thought that 
▁ probably- ’ 
▁ ’ you thought i was a good xxmaj party member . xxmaj pure in word and deed . xxmaj banners , 
▁ processions , slogans , games , community hikes all that stuff . xxmaj and you thought 
▁ that if i had a quarter of a chance xxmaj i ’d denounce you as a thought - criminal and 
▁ get you killed off ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , something of that kind . a great many young girls are like that , you 
▁ know . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s this bloody thing that does it , ’ she said , ripping off the scarlet sash of 
▁ the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league and flinging it on to a bough . xxmaj then , as though 
▁ touching her waist had reminded her of something , she felt in the pocket of her 
▁ overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate . xxmaj she broke it in half and gave 
▁ one of the pieces to xxmaj winston . xxmaj even before he had taken it he knew by the smell 
▁ that it was very unusual chocolate . xxmaj it was dark and shiny , and was wrapped in 
▁ silver paper . xxmaj chocolate normally was dull - brown crumbly stuff that tasted , as 
▁ nearly as one could describe it , like the smoke of a rubbish fire . xxmaj but at some 
▁ time or another he had tasted chocolate like the piece she had given him . xxmaj the 
▁ first whiff of its scent had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down , 
▁ but which was powerful and troubling . 
▁ ’ where did you get this stuff ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ black market , ’ she said indifferently . ’ actually i am that sort of girl , to 
▁ look at . xxmaj i ’ m good at games . i was a troop - leader in the xxmaj spies . i do voluntary 
▁ work three evenings a week for the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league . xxmaj hours and hours 
▁ xxmaj i ’ ve spent pasting their bloody rot all over xxmaj london . i always carry one end of 
▁ a banner in the processions . i always xxmaj iook cheerful and i never shirk anything . 
▁ xxmaj always yell with the crowd , that ’s what i say . xxmaj it ’s the only way to be safe . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the first fragment of chocolate had melted on xxmaj winston ’s tongue . xxmaj the taste 
▁ was delightful . xxmaj but there was still that memory moving round the edges of his 
▁ consciousness , something strongly felt but not reducible to definite shape , like 
▁ 69 
▁ an object seen out of the corner of one ’s eye . xxmaj he pushed it away from him , 
▁ aware only that it was the memory of some action which he would have liked 
▁ to undo but could not . 
▁ ’ you are very young , ’ he said . ’ you are ten or fifteen years younger than i 
▁ am . xxmaj what could you see to attract you in a man like me ? ’ 
▁ ’ it was something in your face . i thought xxmaj i ’d take a chance . xxmaj i ’ m good at 
▁ spotting people who do n’t belong . xxmaj as soon as i saw you i knew you were against 
▁ them . ’ 
▁ xxmaj them , it appeared , meant the xxmaj party , and above all the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , about 
▁ whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made xxmaj winston feel uneasy , 
▁ although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere . 
▁ a thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language . 
▁ xxmaj party members were supposed not to swear , and xxmaj winston himself very seldom 
▁ did swear , aloud , at any rate . xxmaj julia , however , seemed unable to mention the 
▁ xxmaj party , and especially the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , without using the kind of words that you 
▁ saw chalked up in dripping alley - ways . xxmaj he did not dislike it . xxmaj it was merely 
▁ one symptom of her revolt against the xxmaj party and all its ways , and somehow it 
▁ seemed natural and healthy , like the sneeze of a horse that smells bad hay . xxmaj they 
▁ had left the clearing and were wandering again through the chequered shade , 
▁ with their arms round each other ’s waists whenever it was wide enough to walk 
▁ two abreast . xxmaj he noticed how much softer her waist seemed to feel now that the 
▁ sash was gone . xxmaj they did not speak above a whisper . xxmaj outside the clearing , xxmaj julia 
▁ said , it was better to go quietly . xxmaj presently they had reached the edge of the 
▁ little wood . xxmaj she stopped him . 
▁ ’ do n’t go out into the open . xxmaj there might be someone watching . xxmaj we ’re all 
▁ right if we keep behind the boughs . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were standing in the shade of hazel bushes . xxmaj the sunlight , filtering 
▁ through innumerable leaves , was still hot on their faces . xxmaj winston looked out 
▁ into the field beyond , and underwent a curious , slow shock of recognition . xxmaj he 
▁ knew it by sight . xxmaj an old , closebitten pasture , with a footpath wandering across 
▁ it and a molehill here and there . xxmaj in the ragged hedge on the opposite side the 
▁ boughs of the elm trees swayed just perceptibly in the breeze , and their leaves 
▁ stirred faintly in dense masses like women ’s hair . xxmaj surely somewhere nearby , 
▁ but out of sight , there must be a stream with green pools where dace were 
▁ swimming ? 
▁ ’ is n’t there a stream somewhere near here ? ’ he whispered . 
▁ ’ that ’s right , there is a stream . xxmaj it ’s at the edge of the next field , actually . 
▁ xxmaj there are fish in it , great big ones . xxmaj you can watch them lying in the pools under 
▁ the willow trees , waving their tails . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s the xxmaj golden xxmaj country — almost , ’ he murmured . 
▁ ’ the xxmaj golden xxmaj country ? ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s nothing , really . a landscape xxmaj i ’ ve seen sometimes in a dream . ’ 
▁ ’ look ! ’ whispered xxmaj julia . 
▁ a thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away , almost at the level 
▁ of their faces . xxmaj perhaps it had not seen them . xxmaj it was in the sun , they in the 
▁ shade . xxmaj it spread out its wings , fitted them carefully into place again , ducked 
▁ its head for a moment , as though making a sort of obeisance to the sun , and 
▁ then began to pour forth a torrent of song . xxmaj in the afternoon hush the volume 
▁ of sound was startling . xxmaj winston and xxmaj julia clung together , fascinated . xxmaj the 
▁ music went on and on , minute after minute , with astonishing variations , never 
▁ 70 
▁ once repeating itself , almost as though the bird were deliberately showing off 
▁ its virtuosity . xxmaj sometimes it stopped for a few seconds , spread out and resettled 
▁ its wings , then swelled its speckled breast and again burst into song . xxmaj winston 
▁ watched it with a sort of vague reverence . xxmaj for whom , for what , was that bird 
▁ singing ? xxmaj no mate , no rival was watching it . xxmaj what made it sit at the edge of the 
▁ lonely wood and pour its music into nothingness ? xxmaj he wondered whether after 
▁ all there was a microphone hidden somewhere near . xxmaj he and xxmaj julia had spoken 
▁ only in low whispers , and it would not pick up what they had said , but it would 
▁ pick up the thrush . xxmaj perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small , 
▁ beetle - like man was listening intently — listening to that . xxmaj but by degrees the 
▁ flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind . xxmaj it was as though it were a 
▁ kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got mixed up with the sunlight 
▁ that filtered through the leaves . xxmaj he stopped thinking and merely felt . xxmaj the girl ’s 
▁ waist in the bend of his arm was soft and warm . xxmaj he pulled her round so that 
▁ they were breast to breast ; her body seemed to melt into his . xxmaj wherever his 
▁ hands moved it was all as yielding as water . xxmaj their mouths clung together ; it 
▁ was quite different from the hard kisses they had exchanged earlier . xxmaj when they 
▁ moved their faces apart again both of them sighed deeply . xxmaj the bird took fright 
▁ and fled with a clatter of wings . 
▁ xxmaj winston put his lips against her ear . ’ now , ’ he whispered . 
▁ ’ not here , ’ she whispered back . ’ come back to the hide- out . xxmaj it ’s safer . ’ 
▁ xxmaj quickly , with an occasional crackle of twigs , they threaded their way back 
▁ to the clearing . xxmaj when they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned and 
▁ faced him . xxmaj they were both breathing fast . but the smile had reappeared round 
▁ the corners of her mouth . xxmaj she stood looking at him for an instant , then felt 
▁ at the zipper of her overalls . xxmaj and , yes ! it was almost as in his dream . xxmaj almost 
▁ as swiftly as he had imagined it , she had torn her clothes off , and when she 
▁ flung them aside it was with that same magnificent gesture by which a whole 
▁ civilization seemed to be annihilated . xxmaj her body gleamed white in the sun . xxmaj but 
▁ for a moment he did not look at her body ; his eyes were anchored by the freckled 
▁ face with its faint , bold smile . xxmaj he knelt down before her and took her hands in 
▁ his 
▁ ’ have you done this before ? ’ 
▁ ’ of course . xxmaj hundreds of times — well scores of times anyway ’ with xxmaj party 
▁ members . ’ 
▁ ’ yes , always with xxmaj party members . ’ 
▁ ’ with members of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party ? ’ 
▁ ’ not with those swine , no . xxmaj but there ’s plenty that would if they got half a 
▁ chance . xxmaj they ’re not so holy as they make out . ’ 
▁ xxmaj his heart leapt . xxmaj scores of times she had done it : he wished it had been 
▁ hundreds — thousands . xxmaj anything that hinted at corruption always filled him 
▁ with a wild hope . xxmaj who knew , perhaps the xxmaj party was rotten under the surface , 
▁ its cult of strenuousness and self - denial simply a sham concealing iniquity . xxmaj if he 
▁ could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or syphilis , how gladly 
▁ he would have done so ! xxmaj anything to rot , to weaken , to undermine ! xxmaj he pulled 
▁ her down so that they were kneeling face to face . 
▁ ’ listen . xxmaj the more men you ’ ve had , the more i love you . xxmaj do you understand 
▁ that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , perfectly . ’ 
▁ 71 
▁ ’ i hate purity , i hate goodness ! i do n’t want any virtue to exist anywhere . i 
▁ want everyone to be corrupt to the bones . 
▁ ’ well then , i ought to suit you , dear . xxmaj i ’ m corrupt to the bones . ’ 
▁ ’ you like doing this ? i do n’t mean simply me : i mean the thing in itself ? ’ 
▁ ’ i adore it . ’ 
▁ xxmaj that was above all what he wanted to hear . xxmaj not merely the love of one 
▁ person but the animal instinct , the simple undifferentiated desire : that was 
▁ the force that would tear the xxmaj party to pieces . xxmaj he pressed her down upon the 
▁ grass , among the fallen bluebells . xxmaj this time there was no difficulty . xxmaj presently 
▁ the rising and falling of their breasts slowed to normal speed , and in a sort of 
▁ pleasant helplessness they fell apart . xxmaj the sun seemed to have grown hotter . 
▁ xxmaj they were both sleepy . xxmaj he reached out for the discarded overalls and pulled 
▁ them partly over her . xxmaj almost immediately they fell asleep and slept for about 
▁ half an hour . 
▁ xxmaj winston woke first . xxmaj he sat up and watched the freckled face , still peacefully 
▁ asleep , pillowed on the palm of her hand . xxmaj except for her mouth , you could not 
▁ call her beautiful . xxmaj there was a line or two round the eyes , if you looked closely . 
▁ xxmaj the short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and soft . xxmaj it occurred to him that 
▁ he still did not know her surname or where she lived . 
▁ xxmaj the young , strong body , now helpless in sleep , awoke in him a pitying , 
▁ protecting feeling . xxmaj but the mindless tenderness that he had felt under the hazel 
▁ tree , while the thrush was singing , had not quite come back . xxmaj he pulled the 
▁ overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank . xxmaj in the old days , he thought , 
▁ a man looked at a girl ’s body and saw that it was desirable , and that was the 
▁ end of the story . xxmaj but you could not have pure love or pure lust nowadays . xxmaj no 
▁ emotion was pure , because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred . xxmaj their 
▁ embrace had been a battle , the climax a victory . xxmaj it was a blow struck against 
▁ the xxmaj party . xxmaj it was a political act . 
▁ 72 
▁ xxmaj chapter 11 
▁ ’ we can come here once again , ’ said xxmaj julia . ’ it ’s generally safe to use any hide - out 
▁ twice . xxmaj but not for another month or two , of course . ’ 
▁ xxmaj as soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed . xxmaj she became alert and 
▁ business - like , put her clothes on , knotted the scarlet sash about her waist , and 
▁ began arranging the details of the journey home . xxmaj it seemed natural to leave this 
▁ to her . xxmaj she obviously had a practical cunning which xxmaj winston lacked , and she 
▁ seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the countryside round xxmaj london , 
▁ stored away from innumerable community hikes . xxmaj the route she gave him was 
▁ quite different from the one by which he had come , and brought him out at a 
▁ different railway station . ’ never go home the same way as you went out , ’ she 
▁ said , as though enunciating an important general principle . xxmaj she would leave 
▁ first , and xxmaj winston was to wait half an hour before following her . 
▁ xxmaj she had named a place where they could meet after work , four evenings 
▁ hence . xxmaj it was a street in one of the poorer quarters , where there was an open 
▁ market which was generally crowded and noisy . xxmaj she would be hanging about 
▁ among the stalls , pretending to be in search of shoelaces or sewing - thread . xxmaj if she 
▁ judged that the coast was clear she would blow her nose when he approached ; 
▁ otherwise he was to walk past her without recognition . xxmaj but with luck , in the 
▁ middle of the crowd , it would be safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange 
▁ another meeting . 
▁ ’ and now i must go , ’ she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions . 
▁ ’ i ’ m due back at nineteen - thirty . xxmaj i ’ ve got to put in two hours for the xxmaj junior 
▁ anti - sex xxmaj league , handing out leaflets , or something . xxmaj is n’t it bloody ? xxmaj give me a 
▁ brush - down , would you ? xxmaj have i got any twigs in my hair ? xxmaj are you sure ? xxmaj then 
▁ good - bye , my love , good - bye ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj she flung herself into his arms , kissed him almost violently , and a moment 
▁ later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood with 
▁ very little noise . xxmaj even now he had not found out her surname or her address . 
▁ xxmaj however , it made no difference , for it was inconceivable that they could ever 
▁ meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication . 
▁ xxmaj as it happened , they never went back to the clearing in the wood . xxmaj during 
▁ the month of xxmaj may there was only one further occasion on which they actually 
▁ succeeded in making love . xxmaj that was in another hidlng - place known to xxmaj julia , 
▁ the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost - deserted stretch of country where an 
▁ atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier . xxmaj it was a good hiding - place when 
▁ once you got there , but the getting there was very dangerous . xxmaj for the rest 
▁ they could meet only in the streets , in a different place every evening and never 
▁ 73 
▁ for more than half an hour at a time . xxmaj in the street it was usually possible to 
▁ talk , after a fashion . xxmaj as they drifted down the crowded pavements , not quite 
▁ abreast and never looking at one another , they carried on a curious , intermittent 
▁ conversation which flicked on and off like the beams of a lighthouse , suddenly 
▁ nipped into silence by the approach of a xxmaj party uniform or the proximity of a 
▁ telescreen , then taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence , then 
▁ abruptly cut short as they parted at the agreed spot , then continued almost 
▁ without introduction on the following day . xxmaj julia appeared to be quite used to 
▁ this kind of conversation , which she called ’ talking by instalments ’ . xxmaj she was also 
▁ surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips . xxmaj just once in almost a 
▁ month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss . xxmaj they were passing 
▁ in silence down a side - street ( julia would never speak when they were away from 
▁ the main streets ) when there was a deafening roar , the earth heaved , and the air 
▁ darkened , and xxmaj winston found himself lying on his side , bruised and terrified . a 
▁ rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at hand . xxmaj suddenly he became aware 
▁ of xxmaj julia ’s face a few centimetres from his own , deathly white , as white as chalk . 
▁ xxmaj even her lips were white . xxmaj she was dead ! xxmaj he clasped her against him and found 
▁ that he was kissing a live warm face . xxmaj but there was some powdery stuff that 
▁ got in the way of his lips . xxmaj both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster . 
▁ xxmaj there were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to 
▁ walk past one another without a sign , because a patrol had just come round 
▁ the corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead . xxmaj even if it had been less 
▁ dangerous , it would still have been difficult to find time to meet . xxmaj winston ’s 
▁ working week was sixty hours , xxmaj julia ’s was even longer , and their free days varied 
▁ according to the pressure of work and did not often coincide . xxmaj julia , in any case , 
▁ seldom had an evening completely free . xxmaj she spent an astonishing amount of time 
▁ in attending lectures and demonstrations , distributing literature for the junior 
▁ anti - sex xxmaj league , preparing banners for xxmaj hate xxmaj week , making collections for the 
▁ savings campaign , and such - like activities . xxmaj it paid , she said , it was camouflage . 
▁ xxmaj if you kept the small rules , you could break the big ones . xxmaj she even induced 
▁ xxmaj winston to mortgage yet another of his evenings by enrolling himself for the 
▁ part - time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous xxmaj party members . 
▁ xxmaj so , one evening every week , xxmaj winston spent four hours of paralysing boredom , 
▁ screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts of bomb fuses , 
▁ in a draughty , ill - lit workshop where the knocking of hammers mingled drearily 
▁ with the music of the telescreens . 
▁ xxmaj when they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary conversation were filled up . xxmaj it was a blazing afternoon . xxmaj the air in the little square 
▁ chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant , and smelt overpoweringly of 
▁ pigeon dung . xxmaj they sat talking for hours on the dusty , twig - littered floor , one 
▁ or other of them getting up from time to time to cast a glance through the 
▁ arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming . 
▁ xxmaj julia was twenty - six years old . xxmaj she lived in a hostel with thirty other girls 
▁ ( ’ always in the stink of women ! xxmaj how i hate women ! ’ she said parenthetically ) , 
▁ and she worked , as he had guessed , on the novel - writing machines in the xxmaj fiction 
▁ xxmaj department . xxmaj she enjoyed her work , which consisted chiefly in running and 
▁ servicing a powerful but tricky electric motor . xxmaj she was ’ not clever ’ , but was 
▁ fond of using her hands and felt at home with machinery . xxmaj she could describe 
▁ the whole process of composing a novel , from the general directive issued by 
▁ the xxmaj planning xxmaj committee down to the final touching - up by the xxmaj rewrite xxmaj squad . 
▁ 74 
▁ xxmaj but she was not interested in the finished product . xxmaj she ’ did n’t much care for 
▁ reading , ’ she said . xxmaj books were just a commodity that had to be produced , like 
▁ jam or bootlaces . 
▁ xxmaj she had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the only person 
▁ she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the xxmaj revolution 
▁ was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight . xxmaj at school she had 
▁ been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics trophy two years 
▁ running . xxmaj she had been a troop - leader in the xxmaj spies and a branch secretary in the 
▁ xxmaj youth xxmaj league before joining the xxmaj junior anti - sex xxmaj league . xxmaj she had always borne 
▁ an excellent character . xxmaj she had even ( an infallible mark of good reputation ) 
▁ been picked out to work in xxmaj pornosec , the sub - section of the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department 
▁ which turned out cheap pornography for distribution among the proles . xxmaj it was 
▁ nicknamed xxmaj muck xxmaj house by the people who worked in it , she remarked . xxmaj there 
▁ she had remained for a year , helping to produce booklets in sealed packets 
▁ with titles like xxmaj spanking xxmaj stories or xxmaj one xxmaj night in a xxmaj girls ’ xxmaj school , to be bought 
▁ furtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that they were 
▁ buying something illegal . 
▁ ’ what are these books like ? ’ said xxmaj winston curiously . 
▁ ’ oh , ghastly rubbish . xxmaj they ’re boring , really . xxmaj they only have six plots , but 
▁ they swap them round a bit . xxmaj of course i was only on the kaleidoscopes . i was 
▁ never in the xxmaj rewrite xxmaj squad . xxmaj i ’ m not literary , dear — not even enough for that . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he learned with astonishment that all the workers in xxmaj pornosec , except the 
▁ heads of the departments , were girls . xxmaj the theory was that men , whose sex 
▁ instincts were less controllable than those of women , were in greater danger of 
▁ being corrupted by the filth they handled . 
▁ ’ they do n’t even like having married women there , ’ she added . xxmaj girls are 
▁ always supposed to be so pure . xxmaj here ’s one who is n’t , anyway . 
▁ xxmaj she had had her first love - affair when she was sixteen , with a xxmaj party member 
▁ of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest . ’ and a good job too , ’ said 
▁ xxmaj julia , ’ otherwise they ’d have had my name out of him when he confessed . ’ xxmaj since 
▁ then there had been various others . xxmaj life as she saw it was quite simple . xxmaj you 
▁ wanted a good time ; ’ they ’ , meaning the xxmaj party , wanted to stop you having it ; 
▁ you broke the rules as best you couid . xxmaj she seemed to think it just as natural 
▁ that ’ they ’ should want to rob you of your pleasures as that you should want 
▁ to avoid being caught . xxmaj she hated the xxmaj party , and said so in the crudest words , 
▁ but she made no general criticism of it . xxmaj except where it touched upon her 
▁ own life she had no interest in xxmaj party doctrine . xxmaj he noticed that she never used 
▁ xxmaj newspeak words except the ones that had passed into everyday use . xxmaj she had 
▁ never heard of the xxmaj brotherhood , and refused to believe in its existence . xxmaj any 
▁ kind of organized revolt against the xxmaj party , which was bound to be a failure , 
▁ struck her as stupid . xxmaj the clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all 
▁ the same . xxmaj he wondered vaguely how many others like her there might be in the 
▁ younger generation people who had grown up in the world of the xxmaj revolution , 
▁ knowing nothing else , accepting the xxmaj party as something unalterable , like the 
▁ sky , not rebelling against its authority but simply evading it , as a rabbit dodges 
▁ a dog . 
▁ xxmaj they did not discuss the possibility of getting married . xxmaj it was too remote to 
▁ be worth thinking about . xxmaj no imaginable committee would ever sanction such a 
▁ marriage even if xxmaj katharine , xxmaj winston ’s wife , could somehow have been got rid 
▁ of . xxmaj it was hopeless even as a daydream . 
▁ 75 
▁ ’ what was she like , your wife ? ’ said xxmaj julia . 
▁ ’ she was — do you know the xxmaj newspeak word goodthinkful ? xxmaj meaning naturally orthodox , incapable of thinking a bad thought ? ’ 
▁ ’ no , i did n’t know the word , but i know the kind of person , right enough . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he began telling her the story of his married life , but curiously enough she 
▁ appeared to know the essential parts of it already . xxmaj she described to him , almost 
▁ as though she had seen or felt it , the stiffening of xxmaj katharine ’s body as soon as 
▁ he touched her , the way in which she still seemed to be pushing him from her 
▁ with all her strength , even when her arms were clasped tightly round him . xxmaj with 
▁ xxmaj julia he felt no difficulty in talking about such things : xxmaj katharine , in any case , 
▁ had long ceased to be a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one . 
▁ ’ i could have stood it if it had n’t been for one thing , ’ he said . xxmaj he toid her 
▁ about the frigid little ceremony that xxmaj katharine had forced him to go through 
▁ on the same night every week . ’ she hated it , but nothing would make her stop 
▁ doing it . xxmaj she used to call it — but you ’ll never guess . ’ 
▁ ’ our duty to the xxmaj party , ’ said xxmaj julia promptly . 
▁ ’ how did you know that ? ’ 
▁ ’ i ’ ve been at school too , dear . xxmaj sex talks once a month for the over - sixteens . 
▁ xxmaj and in the xxmaj youth xxmaj movement . xxmaj they rub it into you for years . i dare say it works 
▁ in a lot of cases . xxmaj but of course you can never tell ; people are such hypocrites . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she began to enlarge upon the subject . xxmaj with xxmaj julia , everything came back 
▁ to her own sexuality . xxmaj as soon as this was touched upon in any way she was 
▁ capable of great acuteness . xxmaj unlike xxmaj winston , she had grasped the inner meaning 
▁ of the xxmaj party ’s sexual puritanism . xxmaj it was not merely that the sex instinct created 
▁ a world of its own which was outside the xxmaj party ’s control and which therefore 
▁ had to be destroyed if possible . xxmaj what was more important was that sexual 
▁ privation induced hysteria , which was desirable because it could be transformed 
▁ into war - fever and leader - worship . xxmaj the way she put it was : 
▁ ’ when you make love you ’re using up energy ; and afterwards you feel happy 
▁ and do n’t give a damn for anything . xxmaj they ca n’t bear you to feel like that . xxmaj they 
▁ want you to be bursting with energy all the time . xxmaj all this marching up and down 
▁ and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour . xxmaj if you ’re happy inside 
▁ yourself , why should you get excited about xxmaj big xxmaj brother and the three - year 
▁ xxmaj plans and the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate and all the rest of their bloody rot ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj that was very true , he thought . xxmaj there was a direct intimate connexion between chastity and political orthodoxy . xxmaj for how could the fear , the hatred , and 
▁ the lunatic credulity which the xxmaj party needed in its members be kept at the right 
▁ pitch , except by bottling down some powerful instinct and using it as a driving 
▁ force ? xxmaj the sex impulse was dangerous to the xxmaj party , and the xxmaj party had turned 
▁ it to account . xxmaj they had played a similar trick with the instinct of parenthood . 
▁ xxmaj the family could not actually be abolished , and , indeed , people were encouraged to be fond of their children , in almost the old - fashioned way . xxmaj the children , 
▁ on the other hand , were systematically turned against their parents and taught 
▁ to spy on them and report their deviations . xxmaj the family had become in effect an 
▁ extension of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . xxmaj it was a device by means of which everyone 
▁ could be surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately . 
▁ xxmaj abruptly his mind went back to xxmaj katharine . xxmaj katharine would unquestionably 
▁ have denounced him to the xxmaj thought xxmaj police if she had not happened to be too 
▁ stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions . xxmaj but what really recalled 
▁ her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon , which had 
▁ 76 
▁ brought the sweat out on his forehead . xxmaj he began telling xxmaj julia of something that 
▁ had happened , or rather had failed to happen , on another sweltering summer 
▁ afternoon , eleven years ago . 
▁ xxmaj it was three or four months after they were married . xxmaj they had lost their 
▁ way on a community hike somewhere in xxmaj kent . xxmaj they had only lagged behind the 
▁ others for a couple of minutes , but they took a wrong turning , and presently 
▁ found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk quarry . xxmaj it was a 
▁ sheer drop of ten or twenty metres , with boulders at the bottom . xxmaj there was 
▁ nobody of whom they could ask the way . xxmaj as soon as she realized that they were 
▁ lost xxmaj katharine became very uneasy . xxmaj to be away from the noisy mob of hikers 
▁ even for a moment gave her a feeling of wrong - doing . xxmaj she wanted to hurry back 
▁ by the way they had come and start searching in the other direction . xxmaj but at 
▁ this moment xxmaj winston noticed some tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of 
▁ the cliff beneath them . xxmaj one tuft was of two colours , magenta and brick - red , 
▁ apparently growing on the same root . xxmaj he had never seen anything of the kind 
▁ before , and he called to xxmaj katharine to come and look at it . 
▁ ’ look , xxmaj katharine ! xxmaj look at those flowers . xxmaj that clump down near the bottom . 
▁ xxmaj do you see they ’re two different colours ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj she had already turned to go , but she did rather fretfully come back for a 
▁ moment . xxmaj she even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was pointing . 
▁ xxmaj he was standing a little behind her , and he put his hand on her waist to steady 
▁ her . xxmaj at this moment it suddenly occurred to him how completely alone they 
▁ were . xxmaj there was not a human creature anywhere , not a leaf stirring , not even 
▁ a bird awake . xxmaj in a place like this the danger that there would be a hidden 
▁ microphone was very small , and even if there was a microphone it would only 
▁ pick up sounds . xxmaj it was the hottest sleepiest hour of the afternoon . xxmaj the sun 
▁ blazed down upon them , the sweat tickled his face . xxmaj and the thought struck him 
 ▁ … 
▁ ’ why did n’t you give her a good shove ? ’ said xxmaj julia . ’ i would have . ’ 
▁ ’ yes , dear , you would have . i would , if xxmaj i ’d been the same person then as i 
▁ am now . xxmaj or perhaps i would — xxmaj i ’ m not certain . ’ 
▁ ’ are you sorry you did n’t ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . xxmaj on the whole xxmaj i ’ m sorry i did n’t . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were sitting side by side on the dusty floor . xxmaj he pulled her closer against 
▁ him . xxmaj her head rested on his shoulder , the pleasant smell of her hair conquering 
▁ the pigeon dung . xxmaj she was very young , he thought , she still expected something 
▁ from life , she did not understand that to push an inconvenient person over a 
▁ cliff solves nothing . 
▁ ’ actually it would have made no difference , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ then why are you sorry you did n’t do it ? ’ 
▁ ’ only because i prefer a positive to a negative . xxmaj in this game that we ’re 
▁ playing , we ca n’t win . xxmaj some kinds of failure are better than other kinds , that ’s 
▁ all . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent . xxmaj she always contradicted him 
▁ when he said anything of this kind . xxmaj she would not accept it as a law of nature 
▁ that the individual is always defeated . xxmaj in a way she realized that she herself was 
▁ doomed , that sooner or later the xxmaj thought xxmaj police would catch her and kill her , 
▁ but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possible to 
▁ construct a secret world in which you could live as you chose . xxmaj all you needed 
▁ was luck and cunning and boldness . xxmaj she did not understand that there was no 
▁ 77 
▁ such thing as happiness , that the only victory lay in the far future , long after 
▁ you were dead , that from the moment of declaring war on the xxmaj party it was 
▁ better to think of yourself as a corpse . 
▁ ’ we are the dead , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ we ’re not dead yet , ’ said xxmaj julia prosaically . 
▁ ’ not physically . xxmaj six months , a year — five years , conceivably . i am afraid 
▁ of death . xxmaj you are young , so presumably you ’re more afraid of it than i am . 
▁ xxmaj obviously we shall put it off as long as we can . xxmaj but it makes very little difference . 
▁ xxmaj so long as human beings stay human , death and life are the same thing . ’ 
▁ ’ oh , rubbish ! xxmaj which would you sooner sleep with , me or a skeleton ? xxmaj do n’t 
▁ you enjoy being alive ? xxmaj do n’t you like feeling : xxmaj this is me , this is my hand , this 
▁ is my leg , xxmaj i ’ m real , xxmaj i ’ m solid , xxmaj i ’ m alive ! xxmaj do n’t you like this ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj she twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him . xxmaj he could feel 
▁ her breasts , ripe yet firm , through her overalls . xxmaj her body seemed to be pouring 
▁ some of its youth and vigour into his . 
▁ ’ yes , i like that , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ then stop talking about dying . xxmaj and now listen , dear , we ’ ve got to fix up 
▁ about the next time we meet . xxmaj we may as well go back to the place in the wood . 
▁ xxmaj we ’ ve given it a good long rest . xxmaj but you must get there by a different way this 
▁ time . xxmaj i ’ ve got it all planned out . xxmaj you take the train — but look , xxmaj i ’ll draw it out 
▁ for you . ’ 
▁ xxmaj and in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust , and 
▁ with a twig from a pigeon ’s nest began drawing a map on the floor . 
▁ 78 
▁ xxmaj chapter 12 
▁ xxmaj winston looked round the shabby little room above xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s shop . 
▁ xxmaj beside the window the enormous bed was made up , with ragged blankets and 
▁ a coverless bolster . xxmaj the old - fashioned clock with the twelve - hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece . xxmaj in the corner , on the gateleg table , the glass 
▁ paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out of the 
▁ half - darkness . 
▁ xxmaj in the fender was a battered tin oilstove , a saucepan , and two cups , provided 
▁ by xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington . xxmaj winston lit the burner and set a pan of water to boil . xxmaj he 
▁ had brought an envelope full of xxmaj victory xxmaj coffee and some saccharine tablets . 
▁ xxmaj the clock ’s hands said seventeen - twenty : it was nineteen - twenty really . xxmaj she 
▁ was coming at nineteen - thirty . 
▁ xxmaj folly , folly , his heart kept saying : conscious , gratuitous , suicidal folly . xxmaj of all 
▁ the crimes that a xxmaj party member could commit , this one was the least possible 
▁ to conceal . xxmaj actually the idea had first floated into his head in the form of a 
▁ vision , of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface of the gateleg table . 
▁ xxmaj as he had foreseen , xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington had made no difficulty about letting the 
▁ room . xxmaj he was obviously glad of the few dollars that it would bring him . xxmaj nor 
▁ did he seem shocked or become offensively knowing when it was made clear that 
▁ xxmaj winston wanted the room for the purpose of a love - affair . xxmaj instead he looked 
▁ into the middle distance and spoke in generalities , with so delicate an air as 
▁ to give the impression that he had become partly invisible . xxmaj privacy , he said , 
▁ was a very valuable thing . xxmaj everyone wanted a place where they could be alone 
▁ occasionally . xxmaj and when they had such a place , it was only common courtesy in 
▁ anyone else who knew of it to keep his knowledge to himself . xxmaj he even , seeming 
▁ almost to fade out of existence as he did so , added that there were two entries 
▁ to the house , one of them through the back yard , which gave on an alley . 
▁ xxmaj under the window somebody was singing . xxmaj winston peeped out , secure in 
▁ the protection of the muslin curtain . xxmaj the xxmaj june sun was still high in the sky , 
▁ and in the sun - filled court below , a monstrous woman , solid as a xxmaj norman pillar , 
▁ with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her middle , was 
▁ stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line , pegging out a series of 
▁ square white things which xxmaj winston recognized as babies ’ diapers . xxmaj whenever her 
▁ mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she was singing in a powerful contralto : 
▁ xxmaj it was only an ’ opeless fancy . 
▁ xxmaj it passed like an xxmaj ipril dye , 
▁ xxmaj but a look an ’ a word an ’ the dreams they stirred ! 
▁ xxmaj they ’ ave stolen my ’ eart awye ! 
▁ 79 
▁ xxmaj the tune had been haunting xxmaj london for weeks past . xxmaj it was one of countless 
▁ similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub - section of the xxmaj music 
▁ xxmaj department . xxmaj the words of these songs were composed without any human 
▁ intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator . xxmaj but the woman 
▁ sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an almost pleasant sound . 
▁ xxmaj he could hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes on the flagstones , 
▁ and the cries of the children in the street , and somewhere in the far distance 
▁ a faint roar of traffic , and yet the room seemed curiously silent , thanks to the 
▁ absence of a telescreen . 
▁ xxmaj folly , folly , folly ! he thought again . xxmaj it was inconceivable that they could 
▁ frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught . xxmaj but the 
▁ temptation of having a hiding - place that was truly their own , indoors and near 
▁ at hand , had been too much for both of them . xxmaj for some time after their visit to 
▁ the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange meetings . xxmaj working hours 
▁ had been drastically increased in anticipation of xxmaj hate xxmaj week . xxmaj it was more than 
▁ a month distant , but the enormous , complex preparations that it entailed were 
▁ throwing extra work on to everybody . xxmaj finally both of them managed to secure 
▁ a free afternoon on the same day . xxmaj they had agreed to go back to the clearing 
▁ in the wood . xxmaj on the evening beforehand they met briefly in the street . xxmaj as 
▁ usual , xxmaj winston hardly looked at xxmaj julia as they drifted towards one another in 
▁ the crowd , but from the short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was 
▁ paler than usual . 
▁ ’ it ’s all off , ’ she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak . ’ tomorrow , 
▁ i mean . ’ 
▁ ’ what ? ’ 
▁ ’ tomorrow afternoon . i ca n’t come . ’ 
▁ ’ why not ? ’ 
▁ ’ oh , the usual reason . xxmaj it ’s started early this time . ’ 
▁ xxmaj for a moment he was violently angry . xxmaj during the month that he had known 
▁ her the nature of his desire for her had changed . xxmaj at the beginning there had 
▁ been little true sensuality in it . xxmaj their first love - making had been simply an act 
▁ of the will . xxmaj but after the second time it was different . xxmaj the smell of her hair , the 
▁ taste of her mouth , the feeling of her skin seemed to have got inside him , or into 
▁ the air all round him . xxmaj she had become a physical necessity , something that he 
▁ not only wanted but felt that he had a right to . xxmaj when she said that she could 
▁ not come , he had the feeling that she was cheating him . xxmaj but just at this moment 
▁ the crowd pressed them together and their hands accidentally met . xxmaj she gave the 
▁ tips of his fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection . 
▁ xxmaj it struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment 
▁ must be a normal , recurring event ; and a deep tenderness , such as he had not 
▁ felt for her before , suddenly took hold of him . xxmaj he wished that they were a 
▁ married couple of ten years ’ standing . xxmaj he wished that he were walking through 
▁ the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly and without fear , 
▁ talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the household . xxmaj he wished 
▁ above all that they had some place where they could be alone together without 
▁ feeling the obligation to make love every time they met . xxmaj it was not actually at 
▁ that moment , but at some time on the following day , that the idea of renting 
▁ xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s room had occurred to him . xxmaj when he suggested it to xxmaj julia she 
▁ had agreed with unexpected readiness . xxmaj both of them knew that it was lunacy . 
▁ xxmaj it was as though they were intentionally stepping nearer to their graves . xxmaj as he 
▁ 80 
▁ sat waiting on the edge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the xxmaj ministry 
▁ of xxmaj love . xxmaj it was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one ’s 
▁ consciousness . xxmaj there it lay , fixed in future times , preceding death as surely as 
▁ 99 precedes 100 . xxmaj one could not avoid it , but one could perhaps postpone it : 
▁ and yet instead , every now and again , by a conscious , wilful act , one chose to 
▁ shorten the interval before it happened . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment there was a quick step on the stairs . xxmaj julia burst into the 
▁ room . xxmaj she was carrying a tool - bag of coarse brown canvas , such as he had 
▁ sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the xxmaj ministry . xxmaj he started forward to 
▁ take her in his arms , but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly , partly because 
▁ she was still holding the tool - bag . 
▁ ’ half a second , ’ she said . ’ just let me show you what xxmaj i ’ ve brought . xxmaj did you 
▁ bring some of that filthy xxmaj victory xxmaj coffee ? i thought you would . xxmaj you can chuck 
▁ it away again , because we sha n’t be needing it . xxmaj look here . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she fell on her knees , threw open the bag , and tumbled out some spanners 
▁ and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it . xxmaj underneath were a number of 
▁ neat paper packets . xxmaj the first packet that she passed to xxmaj winston had a strange 
▁ and yet vaguely familiar feeling . xxmaj it was filled with some kind of heavy , sand - like 
▁ stuff which yielded wherever you touched it . 
▁ ’ it is n’t sugar ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ real sugar . xxmaj not saccharine , sugar . xxmaj and here ’s a loaf of bread proper white 
▁ bread , not our bloody stuff — and a little pot of jam . xxmaj and here ’s a tin of milk 
▁ — but look ! xxmaj this is the one xxmaj i ’ m really proud of . i had to wrap a bit of sacking 
▁ round it , because- ’ 
▁ xxmaj but she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up . xxmaj the smell was 
▁ already filling the room , a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation from 
▁ his early childhood , but which one did occasionally meet with even now , blowing 
▁ down a passage - way before a door slammed , or diffusing itself mysteriously in 
▁ a crowded street , sniffed for an instant and then lost again . 
▁ ’ it ’s coffee , ’ he murmured , ’ real coffee . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s xxmaj inner xxmaj party coffee . xxmaj there ’s a whole kilo here , she said . 
▁ ’ how did you manage to get hold of all these things ? ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s all xxmaj inner xxmaj party stuff . xxmaj there ’s nothing those swine do n’t have , nothing . 
▁ xxmaj but of course waiters and servants and people pinch things , and — look , i got 
▁ a little packet of tea as well . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston had squatted down beside her . xxmaj he tore open a corner of the packet . 
▁ ’ it ’s real tea . xxmaj not blackberry leaves . ’ 
▁ ’ there ’s been a lot of tea about lately . xxmaj they ’ ve captured xxmaj india , or something , ’ she said vaguely . ’ but listen , dear . i want you to turn your back on me 
▁ for three minutes . xxmaj go and sit on the other side of the bed . xxmaj do n’t go too near 
▁ the window . xxmaj and do n’t turn round till i tell you . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain . xxmaj down in the yard 
▁ the red - armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and 
▁ the line . xxmaj she took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep feeling : 
▁ xxmaj they sye that time ’ eals all things , 
▁ xxmaj they sye you can always forget ; 
▁ xxmaj but the smiles an ’ the tears acrorss the years 
▁ xxmaj they twist my ’ eart - strings yet ! 
▁ xxmaj she knew the whole drivelling song by heart , it seemed . xxmaj her voice floated 
▁ upward with the sweet summer air , very tuneful , charged with a sort of happy 
▁ 81 
▁ melancholy . xxmaj one had the feeling that she would have been perfectly content , if 
▁ the xxmaj june evening had been endless and the supply of clothes inexhaustible , to 
▁ remain there for a thousand years , pegging out diapers and singing rubbish . xxmaj it 
▁ struck him as a curious fact that he had never heard a member of the xxmaj party 
▁ singing alone and spontaneously . xxmaj it would even have seemed slightly unorthodox , a dangerous eccentricity , like talking to oneself . xxmaj perhaps it was only when 
▁ people were somewhere near the starvation level that they had anything to sing 
▁ about . 
▁ ’ you can turn round now , ’ said xxmaj julia . 
▁ xxmaj he turned round , and for a second almost failed to recognize her . xxmaj what 
▁ he had actually expected was to see her naked . xxmaj but she was not naked . xxmaj the 
▁ transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that . xxmaj she 
▁ had painted her face . 
▁ xxmaj she must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and bought 
▁ herself a complete set of make - up materials . xxmaj her lips were deeply reddened , her 
▁ cheeks rouged , her nose powdered ; there was even a touch of something under 
▁ the eyes to make them brighter . xxmaj it was not very skilfully done , but xxmaj winston ’s 
▁ standards in such matters were not high . xxmaj he had never before seen or imagined 
▁ a woman of the xxmaj party with cosmetics on her face . xxmaj the improvement in her 
▁ appearance was startling . xxmaj with just a few dabs of colour in the right places 
▁ she had become not only very much prettier , but , above all , far more feminine . 
▁ xxmaj her short hair and boyish overalls merely added to the effect . xxmaj as he took her 
▁ in his arms a wave of synthetic violets flooded his nostrils . xxmaj he remembered the 
▁ half - darkness of a basement kitchen , and a woman ’s cavernous mouth . xxmaj it was 
▁ the very same scent that she had used ; but at the moment it did not seem to 
▁ matter . 
▁ ’ scent too ! ’ he said . 
▁ ’ yes , dear , scent too . xxmaj and do you know what xxmaj i ’ m going to do next ? xxmaj i ’ m 
▁ going to get hold of a real woman ’s frock from somewhere and wear it instead 
▁ of these bloody trousers . xxmaj i ’ll wear silk stockings and high - heeled shoes ! xxmaj in this 
▁ room xxmaj i ’ m going to be a woman , not a xxmaj party comrade . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed . xxmaj it 
▁ was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence . xxmaj until now 
▁ he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body , with the varicose 
▁ veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch over his ankle . xxmaj there 
▁ were no sheets , but the blanket they lay on was threadbare and smooth , and 
▁ the size and springiness of the bed astonished both of them . ’ it ’s sure to be full 
▁ of bugs , but who cares ? ’ said xxmaj julia . xxmaj one never saw a double bed nowadays , 
▁ except in the homes of the proles . xxmaj winston had occasionally slept in one in his 
▁ boyhood : xxmaj julia had never been in one before , so far as she could remember . 
▁ xxmaj presently they fell asleep for a little while . xxmaj when xxmaj winston woke up the 
▁ hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine . xxmaj he did not stir , because 
▁ xxmaj julia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm . xxmaj most of her make - up 
▁ had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster , but a light stain of rouge still 
▁ brought out the beauty of her cheekbone . a yellow ray from the sinking sun fell 
▁ across the foot of the bed and lighted up the fireplace , where the water in the 
▁ pan was boiling fast . xxmaj down in the yard the woman had stopped singing , but the 
▁ faint shouts of children floated in from the street . xxmaj he wondered vaguely whether 
▁ in the abolished past it had been a normal experience to lie in bed like this , in 
▁ the cool of a summer evening , a man and a woman with no clothes on , making 
▁ 82 
▁ love when they chose , talking of what they chose , not feeling any compulsion 
▁ to get up , simply lying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside . xxmaj surely 
▁ there could never have been a time when that seemed ordinary ? xxmaj julia woke up , 
▁ rubbed her eyes , and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove . 
▁ ’ half that water ’s boiled away , ’ she said . ’ i ’ll get up and make some coffee 
▁ in another moment . xxmaj we ’ ve got an hour . xxmaj what time do they cut the lights off 
▁ at your flats ? ’ 
▁ ’ twenty - three thirty . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s twenty - three at the hostel . xxmaj but you have to get in earlier than that , 
▁ because — xxmaj hi ! xxmaj get out , you filthy brute ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj she suddenly twisted herself over in the bed , seized a shoe from the floor , 
▁ and sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm , exactly as 
▁ he had seen her fling the dictionary at xxmaj goldstein , that morning during the xxmaj two 
▁ xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate . 
▁ ’ what was it ? ’ he said in surprise . 
▁ ’ a rat . i saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting . xxmaj there ’s a 
▁ hole down there . i gave him a good fright , anyway . ’ 
▁ ’ rats ! ’ murmured xxmaj winston . ’ in this room ! ’ 
▁ ’ they ’re all over the place , ’ said xxmaj julia indifferently as she lay down again . 
▁ ’ we ’ ve even got them in the kitchen at the hostel . xxmaj some parts of xxmaj london are 
▁ swarming with them . xxmaj did you know they attack children ? xxmaj yes , they do . xxmaj in 
▁ some of these streets a woman dare n’t leave a baby alone for two minutes . xxmaj it ’s 
▁ the great huge brown ones that do it . xxmaj and the nasty thing is that the brutes 
▁ always- ’ 
▁ ’ do n’t go on ! ’ said xxmaj winston , with his eyes tightly shut . 
▁ ’ dearest ! xxmaj you ’ ve gone quite pale . xxmaj what ’s the matter ? xxmaj do they make you 
▁ feel sick ? ’ 
▁ ’ of all horrors in the world — a rat ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj she pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him , as though 
▁ to reassure him with the warmth of her body . xxmaj he did not reopen his eyes 
▁ immediately . xxmaj for several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a 
▁ nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life . xxmaj it was 
▁ always very much the same . xxmaj he was standing in front of a wall of darkness , and 
▁ on the other side of it there was something unendurable , something too dreadful 
▁ to be faced . xxmaj in the dream his deepest feeling was always one of self - deception , 
▁ because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of darkness . xxmaj with a 
▁ deadly effort , like wrenching a piece out of his own brain , he could even have 
▁ dragged the thing into the open . xxmaj he always woke up without discovering what 
▁ it was : but somehow it was connected with what xxmaj julia had been saying when 
▁ he cut her short . 
▁ ’ i ’ m sorry , ’ he said , ’ it ’s nothing . i do n’t like rats , that ’s all . ’ 
▁ ’ do n’t worry , dear , we ’re not going to have the filthy brutes in here . xxmaj i ’ll stuff 
▁ the hole with a bit of sacking before we go . xxmaj and next time we come here xxmaj i ’ll 
▁ bring some plaster and bung it up properly . ’ 
▁ xxmaj already the black instant of panic was half - forgotten . xxmaj feeling slightly ashamed 
▁ of himself , he sat up against the bedhead . xxmaj julia got out of bed , pulled on her 
▁ overalls , and made the coffee . xxmaj the smell that rose from the saucepan was so 
▁ powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest anybody outside should 
▁ notice it and become inquisitive . xxmaj what was even better than the taste of the 
▁ coffee was the silky texture given to it by the sugar , a thing xxmaj winston had almost 
▁ 83 
▁ forgotten after years of saccharine . xxmaj with one hand in her pocket and a piece of 
▁ bread and jam in the other , xxmaj julia wandered about the room , glancing indifferently at the bookcase , pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table , 
▁ plumping herself down in the ragged arm - chair to see if it was comfortable , and 
▁ examining the absurd twelve - hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement . xxmaj she 
▁ brought the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better 
▁ light . xxmaj he took it out of her hand , fascinated , as always , by the soft , rainwatery 
▁ appearance of the glass . 
▁ ’ what is it , do you think ? ’ said xxmaj julia . 
▁ ’ i do n’t think it ’s anything - i mean , i do n’t think it was ever put to any use . 
▁ xxmaj that ’s what i like about it . xxmaj it ’s a little chunk of history that they ’ ve forgotten 
▁ to alter . xxmaj it ’s a message from a hundred years ago , if one knew how to read it . ’ 
▁ ’ and that picture over there ’ — she nodded at the engraving on the opposite 
▁ wall-’would that be a hundred years old ? ’ 
▁ ’ more . xxmaj two hundred , i dare say . xxmaj one ca n’t tell . xxmaj it ’s impossible to discover 
▁ the age of anything nowadays . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she went over to look at it . ’ here ’s where that brute stuck his nose out , ’ 
▁ she said , kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture . ’ what is this 
▁ place ? xxmaj i ’ ve seen it before somewhere . ’ 
▁ ’ it ’s a church , or at least it used to be . xxmaj st xxmaj clement xxmaj danes its name was . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the fragment of rhyme that xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington had taught him came back into 
▁ his head , and he added half - nostalgically : ” oranges and lemons , say the bells 
▁ of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s ! ” 
▁ xxmaj to his astonishment she capped the line : 
▁ ’ you owe me three farthings , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s , 
▁ xxmaj when will you pay me ? say the bells of xxmaj old xxmaj bailey — ’ 
▁ ’ i ca n’t remember how it goes on after that . xxmaj but anyway i remember it ends 
▁ up , ” here comes a candle to light you to bed , here comes a chopper to chop off 
▁ your head ! ” 
▁ xxmaj it was like the two halves of a countersign . xxmaj but there must be another line 
▁ after ’ the bells of xxmaj old xxmaj bailey ’ . xxmaj perhaps it could be dug out of xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s 
▁ memory , if he were suitably prompted . 
▁ ’ who taught you that ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ my grandfather . xxmaj he used to say it to me when i was a little girl . xxmaj he was 
▁ vaporized when i was eight — at any rate , he disappeared . i wonder what a 
▁ lemon was , ’ she added inconsequently . ’ i ’ ve seen oranges . xxmaj they ’re a kind of 
▁ round yellow fruit with a thick skin . ’ 
▁ ’ i can remember lemons , ’ said xxmaj winston . ’ they were quite common in the 
▁ fifties . xxmaj they were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell them . ’ 
▁ ’ i bet that picture ’s got bugs behind it , ’ said xxmaj julia . ’ i ’ll take it down and 
▁ give it a good clean some day . i suppose it ’s almost time we were leaving . i 
▁ must start washing this paint off . xxmaj what a bore ! xxmaj i ’ll get the lipstick off your face 
▁ afterwards . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston did not get up for a few minutes more . xxmaj the room was darkening . 
▁ xxmaj he turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight . xxmaj the 
▁ inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the interior 
▁ of the glass itself . xxmaj there was such a depth of it , and yet it was almost as 
▁ transparent as air . xxmaj it was as though the surface of the glass had been the arch 
▁ of the sky , enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere complete . xxmaj he had the 
▁ feeling that he could get inside it , and that in fact he was inside it , along with 
▁ 84 
▁ the mahogany bed and the gateleg table , and the clock and the steel engraving 
▁ and the paperweight itself . xxmaj the paperweight was the room he was in , and the 
▁ coral was xxmaj julia ’s life and his own , fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the 
▁ crystal . 
▁ 85 
▁ xxmaj chapter 13 
▁ xxmaj syme had vanished . a morning came , and he was missing from work : a few 
▁ thoughtless people commented on his absence . xxmaj on the next day nobody mentioned him . xxmaj on the third day xxmaj winston went into the vestibule of the xxmaj records 
▁ xxmaj department to look at the notice - board . xxmaj one of the notices carried a printed 
▁ list of the members of the xxmaj chess xxmaj committee , of whom xxmaj syme had been one . xxmaj it 
▁ looked almost exactly as it had looked before — nothing had been crossed out 
▁ — but it was one name shorter . xxmaj it was enough . xxmaj syme had ceased to exist : he 
▁ had never existed . 
▁ xxmaj the weather was baking hot . xxmaj in the labyrinthine xxmaj ministry the windowless , 
▁ air - conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature , but outside the pavements scorched one ’s feet and the stench of the xxmaj tubes at the rush hours was 
▁ a horror . xxmaj the preparations for xxmaj hate xxmaj week were in full swing , and the staffs of 
▁ all the xxmaj ministries were working overtime . xxmaj processions , meetings , military parades , lectures , waxworks , displays , film shows , telescreen programmes all had 
▁ to be organized ; stands had to be erected , effigies built , slogans coined , songs 
▁ written , rumours circulated , photographs faked . xxmaj julia ’s unit in the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department had been taken off the production of novels and was rushing out a 
▁ series of atrocity pamphlets . xxmaj winston , in addition to his regular work , spent 
▁ long periods every day in going through back files of xxmaj the xxmaj times and altering 
▁ and embellishing news items which were to be quoted in speeches . xxmaj late at 
▁ night , when crowds of rowdy proles roamed the streets , the town had a curiously febrile air . xxmaj the rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever , and sometimes 
▁ in the far distance there were enormous explosions which no one could explain 
▁ and about which there were wild rumours . 
▁ xxmaj the new tune which was to be the theme - song of xxmaj hate xxmaj week ( the xxmaj hate xxmaj song , 
▁ it was called ) had already been composed and was being endlessly plugged on 
▁ the telescreens . xxmaj it had a savage , barking rhythm which could not exactly be 
▁ called music , but resembled the beating of a drum . xxmaj roared out by hundreds of 
▁ voices to the tramp of marching feet , it was terrifying . xxmaj the proles had taken a 
▁ fancy to it , and in the midnight streets it competed with the still - popular ’ it 
▁ was only a hopeless fancy ’ . xxmaj the xxmaj parsons children played it at all hours of the 
▁ night and day , unbearably , on a comb and a piece of toilet paper . xxmaj winston ’s 
▁ evenings were fuller than ever . xxmaj squads of volunteers , organized by xxmaj parsons , 
▁ were preparing the street for xxmaj hate xxmaj week , stitching banners , painting posters , 
▁ erecting flagstaffs on the roofs , and perilously slinging wires across the street for 
▁ the reception of streamers . xxmaj parsons boasted that xxmaj victory xxmaj mansions alone would 
▁ display four hundred metres of bunting . xxmaj he was in his native element and as 
▁ 86 
▁ happy as a lark . xxmaj the heat and the manual work had even given him a pretext 
▁ for reverting to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings . xxmaj he was everywhere at 
▁ once , pushing , pulling , sawing , hammering , improvising , jollying everyone along 
▁ with comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body what 
▁ seemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid - smelling sweat . 
▁ a new poster had suddenly appeared all over xxmaj london . xxmaj it had no caption , 
▁ and represented simply the monstrous figure of a xxmaj eurasian soldier , three or four 
▁ metres high , striding forward with expressionless xxmaj mongolian face and enormous 
▁ boots , a submachine gun pointed from his hip . xxmaj from whatever angle you looked 
▁ at the poster , the muzzle of the gun , magnified by the foreshortening , seemed 
▁ to be pointed straight at you . xxmaj the thing had been plastered on every blank 
▁ space on every wall , even outnumbering the portraits of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj the 
▁ proles , normally apathetic about the war , were being lashed into one of their 
▁ periodical frenzies of patriotism . xxmaj as though to harmonize with the general 
▁ mood , the rocket bombs had been killing larger numbers of people than usual . 
▁ xxmaj one fell on a crowded film theatre in xxmaj stepney , burying several hundred victims 
▁ among the ruins . xxmaj the whole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a 
▁ long , trailing funeral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation 
▁ meeting . xxmaj another bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a 
▁ playground and several dozen children were blown to pieces . xxmaj there were further 
▁ angry demonstrations , xxmaj goldstein was burned in effigy , hundreds of copies of the 
▁ poster of the xxmaj eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames , and 
▁ a number of shops were looted in the turmoil ; then a rumour flew round that 
▁ spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves , and an old 
▁ couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had their house set on 
▁ fire and perished of suffocation . 
▁ xxmaj in the room over xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s shop , when they could get there , xxmaj julia 
▁ and xxmaj winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window , naked for 
▁ the sake of coolness . xxmaj the rat had never come back , but the bugs had multiplied 
▁ hideously in the heat . xxmaj it did not seem to matter . xxmaj dirty or clean , the room was 
▁ paradise . xxmaj as soon as they arrived they would sprinkle everything with pepper 
▁ bought on the black market , tear off their clothes , and make love with sweating 
▁ bodies , then fall asleep and wake to find that the bugs had rallied and were 
▁ massing for the counter - attack . 
▁ xxmaj four , five , six — seven times they met during the month of xxmaj june . xxmaj winston 
▁ had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours . xxmaj he seemed to have lost the 
▁ need for it . xxmaj he had grown fatter , his varicose ulcer had subsided , leaving only a 
▁ brown stain on the skin above his ankle , his fits of coughing in the early morning 
▁ had stopped . xxmaj the process of life had ceased to be intolerable , he had no longer 
▁ any impulse to make faces at the telescreen or shout curses at the top of his 
▁ voice . xxmaj now that they had a secure hiding - place , almost a home , it did not even 
▁ seem a hardship that they could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours 
▁ at a time . xxmaj what mattered was that the room over the junk - shop should exist . 
▁ xxmaj to know that it was there , inviolate , was almost the same as being in it . xxmaj the 
▁ room was a world , a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk . xxmaj mr 
▁ xxmaj charrington , thought xxmaj winston , was another extinct animal . xxmaj he usually stopped 
▁ to talk with xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairs . xxmaj the old 
▁ man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors , and on the other hand to 
▁ have almost no customers . xxmaj he led a ghostlike existence between the tiny , dark 
▁ shop , and an even tinier back kitchen where he prepared his meals and which 
▁ 87 
▁ contained , among other things , an unbelievably ancient gramophone with an 
▁ enormous horn . xxmaj he seemed glad of the opportunity to talk . xxmaj wandering about 
▁ among his worthless stock , with his long nose and thick spectacles and his bowed 
▁ shoulders in the velvet jacket , he had always vaguely the air of being a collector 
▁ rather than a tradesman . xxmaj with a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this 
▁ scrap of rubbish or that — a china bottle - stopper , the painted lid of a broken 
▁ snuffbox , a pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long - dead baby ’s hair 
▁ — never asking that xxmaj winston should buy it , merely that he should admire it . xxmaj to 
▁ talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn - out musical - box . xxmaj he had 
▁ dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments of forgotten 
▁ rhymes . xxmaj there was one about four and twenty blackbirds , and another about a 
▁ cow with a crumpled horn , and another about the death of poor xxmaj cock xxmaj robin . ’ it 
▁ just occurred to me you might be interested , ’ he would say with a deprecating 
▁ little laugh whenever he produced a new fragment . xxmaj but he could never recall 
▁ more than a few lines of any one rhyme . 
▁ xxmaj both of them knew - in a way , it was never out of their minds that what 
▁ was now happening could not last long . xxmaj there were times when the fact of 
▁ impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on , and they would 
▁ cling together with a sort of despairing sensuality , like a damned soul grasping 
▁ at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within five minutes of striking . 
▁ xxmaj but there were also times when they had the illusion not only of safety but 
▁ of permanence . xxmaj so long as they were actually in this room , they both felt , no 
▁ harm could come to them . xxmaj getting there was difficult and dangerous , but the 
▁ room itself was sanctuary . xxmaj it was as when xxmaj winston had gazed into the heart 
▁ of the paperweight , with the feeling that it would be possible to get inside that 
▁ glassy world , and that once inside it time could be arrested . xxmaj often they gave 
▁ themselves up to daydreams of escape . xxmaj their luck would hold indefinitely , and 
▁ they would carry on their intrigue , just like this , for the remainder of their 
▁ natural lives . xxmaj or xxmaj katharine would die , and by subtle manoeuvrings xxmaj winston 
▁ and xxmaj julia would succeed in getting married . xxmaj or they would commit suicide 
▁ together . xxmaj or they would disappear , alter themselves out of recognition , learn 
▁ to speak with proletarian accents , get jobs in a factory and live out their lives 
▁ undetected in a back - street . xxmaj it was all nonsense , as they both knew . xxmaj in reality 
▁ there was no escape . xxmaj even the one plan that was practicable , suicide , they 
▁ had no intention of carrying out . xxmaj to hang on from day to day and from week 
▁ to week , spinning out a present that had no future , seemed an unconquerable 
▁ instinct , just as one ’s lungs will always draw the next breath so long as there is 
▁ air available . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes , too , they talked of engaging in active rebellion against the xxmaj party , 
▁ but with no notion of how to take the first step . xxmaj even if the fabulous xxmaj brotherhood was a reality , there still remained the difficulty of finding one ’s way into 
▁ it . xxmaj he told her of the strange intimacy that existed , or seemed to exist , between 
▁ himself and o’brien , and of the impulse he sometimes felt , simply to walk into 
▁ o’brien ’s presence , announce that he was the enemy of the xxmaj party , and demand 
▁ his help . xxmaj curiously enough , this did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing 
▁ to do . xxmaj she was used to judging people by their faces , and it seemed natural to 
▁ her that xxmaj winston should believe o’brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a 
▁ single flash of the eyes . xxmaj moreover she took it for granted that everyone , or nearly 
▁ everyone , secretly hated the xxmaj party and would break the rules if he thought it 
▁ safe to do so . xxmaj but she refused to believe that widespread , organized opposition 
▁ 88 
▁ existed or could exist . xxmaj the tales about xxmaj goldstein and his underground army , 
▁ she said , were simply a lot of rubbish which the xxmaj party had invented for its own 
▁ purposes and which you had to pretend to believe in . xxmaj times beyond number , 
▁ at xxmaj party rallies and spontaneous demonstrations , she had shouted at the top of 
▁ her voice for the execution of people whose names she had never heard and in 
▁ whose supposed crimes she had not the faintest belief . xxmaj when public trials were 
▁ happening she had taken her place in the detachments from the xxmaj youth xxmaj league 
▁ who surrounded the courts from morning to night , chanting at intervals ’ death 
▁ to the traitors ! ’ xxmaj during the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate she always excelled all others in 
▁ shouting insults at xxmaj goldstein . xxmaj yet she had only the dimmest idea of who xxmaj goldstein was and what doctrines he was supposed to represent . xxmaj she had grown up 
▁ since the xxmaj revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of 
▁ the fifties and sixties . xxmaj such a thing as an independent political movement was 
▁ outside her imagination : and in any case the xxmaj party was invincible . xxmaj it would 
▁ always exist , and it would always be the same . xxmaj you could only rebel against it 
▁ by secret disobedience or , at most , by isolated acts of violence such as killing 
▁ somebody or blowing something up . 
▁ xxmaj in some ways she was far more acute than xxmaj winston , and far less susceptible 
▁ to xxmaj party propaganda . xxmaj once when he happened in some connexion to mention 
▁ the war against xxmaj eurasia , she startled him by saying casually that in her opinion 
▁ the war was not happening . xxmaj the rocket bombs which fell daily on xxmaj london 
▁ were probably fired by the xxmaj government of xxmaj oceania itself , ’ just to keep people 
▁ frightened ’ . xxmaj this was an idea that had literally never occurred to him . xxmaj she 
▁ also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes 
▁ xxmaj hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out laughing . xxmaj but she only 
▁ questioned the teachings of the xxmaj party when they in some way touched upon her 
▁ own life . xxmaj often she was ready to accept the official mythology , simply because 
▁ the difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her . xxmaj she 
▁ believed , for instance , having learnt it at school , that the xxmaj party had invented 
▁ aeroplanes . ( in his own schooldays , xxmaj winston remembered , in the late fifties , 
▁ it was only the helicopter that the xxmaj party claimed to have invented ; a dozen 
▁ years later , when xxmaj julia was at school , it was already claiming the aeroplane ; 
▁ one generation more , and it would be claiming the steam engine . ) xxmaj and when 
▁ he told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and long 
▁ before the xxmaj revolution , the fact struck her as totally uninteresting . xxmaj after all , 
▁ what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes ? xxmaj it was rather more of a shock 
▁ to him when he discovered from some chance remark that she did not remember 
▁ that xxmaj oceania , four years ago , had been at war with xxmaj eastasia and at peace with 
▁ xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj it was true that she regarded the whole war as a sham : but apparently 
▁ she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy had changed . ’ i thought 
▁ we ’d always been at war with xxmaj eurasia , ’ she said vaguely . xxmaj it frightened him a 
▁ little . xxmaj the invention of aeroplanes dated from long before her birth , but the 
▁ switchover in the war had happened only four years ago , well after she was 
▁ grown up . xxmaj he argued with her about it for perhaps a quarter of an hour . xxmaj in 
▁ the end he succeeded in forcing her memory back until she did dimly recall that 
▁ at one time xxmaj eastasia and not xxmaj eurasia had been the enemy . xxmaj but the issue still 
▁ struck her as unimportant . ’ who cares ? ’ she said impatiently . ’ it ’s always one 
▁ bloody war after another , and one knows the news is all lies anyway . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes he talked to her of the xxmaj records xxmaj department and the impudent 
▁ forgeries that he committed there . xxmaj such things did not appear to horrify her . 
▁ 89 
▁ xxmaj she did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought of lies becoming truths . xxmaj he told her the story of xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford and 
▁ the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between his fingers . xxmaj it did 
▁ not make much impression on her . xxmaj at first , indeed , she failed to grasp the point 
▁ of the story . 
▁ ’ were they friends of yours ? ’ she said . 
▁ ’ no , i never knew them . xxmaj they were xxmaj inner xxmaj party members . xxmaj besides , they 
▁ were far older men than i was . xxmaj they belonged to the old days , before the 
▁ xxmaj revolution . i barely knew them by sight . ’ 
▁ ’ then what was there to worry about ? xxmaj people are being killed off all the 
▁ time , are n’t they ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he tried to make her understand . ’ this was an exceptional case . xxmaj it was n’t 
▁ just a question of somebody being killed . xxmaj do you realize that the past , starting 
▁ from yesterday , has been actually abolished ? xxmaj if it survives anywhere , it ’s in a 
▁ few solid objects with no words attached to them , like that lump of glass there . 
▁ xxmaj already we know almost literally nothing about the xxmaj revolution and the years 
▁ before the xxmaj revolution . xxmaj every record has been destroyed or falsified , every book 
▁ has been rewritten , every picture has been repainted , every statue and street 
▁ and building has been renamed , every date has been altered . xxmaj and that process 
▁ is continuing day by day and minute by minute . xxmaj history has stopped . xxmaj nothing 
▁ exists except an endless present in which the xxmaj party is always right . i know , of 
▁ course , that the past is falsified , but it would never be possible for me to prove 
▁ it , even when i did the falsification myself . xxmaj after the thing is done , no evidence 
▁ ever remains . xxmaj the only evidence is inside my own mind , and i do n’t know with 
▁ any certainty that any other human being shares my memories . xxmaj just in that 
▁ one instance , in my whole life , i did possess actual concrete evidence after the 
▁ event — years after it . ’ 
▁ ’ and what good was that ? ’ 
▁ ’ it was no good , because i threw it away a few minutes later . xxmaj but if the 
▁ same thing happened today , i should keep it . ’ 
▁ ’ well , i would n’t ! ’ said xxmaj julia . ’ i ’ m quite ready to take risks , but only for 
▁ something worth while , not for bits of old newspaper . xxmaj what could you have 
▁ done with it even if you had kept it ? ’ 
▁ ’ not much , perhaps . xxmaj but it was evidence . xxmaj it might have planted a few 
▁ doubts here and there , supposing that xxmaj i ’d dared to show it to anybody . i do n’t 
▁ imagine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime . xxmaj but one can imagine 
▁ little knots of resistance springing up here and there — small groups of people 
▁ banding themselves together , and gradually growing , and even leaving a few 
▁ records behind , so that the next generations can carry on where we leave off . ’ 
▁ ’ i ’ m not interested in the next generation , dear . xxmaj i ’ m interested in us . 
▁ ’ you ’re only a rebel from the waist downwards , ’ he told her . 
▁ xxmaj she thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight . 
▁ xxmaj in the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interest . 
▁ xxmaj whenever he began to talk of the principles of xxmaj ingsoc , doublethink , the mutability of the past , and the denial of objective reality , and to use xxmaj newspeak 
▁ words , she became bored and confused and said that she never paid any attention to that kind of thing . xxmaj one knew that it was all rubbish , so why let oneself 
▁ be worried by it ? xxmaj she knew when to cheer and when to boo , and that was all 
▁ one needed . xxmaj if he persisted in talking of such subjects , she had a disconcerting 
▁ habit of falling asleep . xxmaj she was one of those people who can go to sleep at 
▁ 90 
▁ any hour and in any position . xxmaj talking to her , he realized how easy it was to 
▁ present an appearance of orthodoxy while having no grasp whatever of what 
▁ orthodoxy meant . xxmaj in a way , the world - view of the xxmaj party imposed itself most 
▁ successfully on people incapable of understanding it . xxmaj they could be made to accept the most flagrant violations of reality , because they never fully grasped the 
▁ enormity of what was demanded of them , and were not sufficiently interested 
▁ in public events to notice what was happening . xxmaj by lack of understanding they 
▁ remained sane . xxmaj they simply swallowed everything , and what they swallowed 
▁ did them no harm , because it left no residue behind , just as a grain of corn will 
▁ pass undigested through the body of a bird . 
▁ 91 
▁ xxmaj chapter 14 
▁ xxmaj it had happened at last . xxmaj the expected message had come . xxmaj all his life , it seemed 
▁ to him , he had been waiting for this to happen . 
▁ xxmaj he was walking down the long corridor at the xxmaj ministry and he was almost 
▁ at the spot where xxmaj julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became 
▁ aware that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him . xxmaj the 
▁ person , whoever it was , gave a small cough , evidently as a prelude to speaking . 
▁ xxmaj winston stopped abruptly and turned . xxmaj it was o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj at last they were face to face , and it seemed that his only impulse was 
▁ to run away . xxmaj his heart bounded violently . xxmaj he would have been incapable of 
▁ speaking . o’brien , however , had continued forward in the same movement , 
▁ laying a friendly hand for a moment on xxmaj winston ’s arm , so that the two of them 
▁ were walking side by side . xxmaj he began speaking with the peculiar grave courtesy 
▁ that differentiated him from the majority of xxmaj inner xxmaj party members . 
▁ ’ i had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you , ’ he said . ’ i was 
▁ reading one of your xxmaj newspeak articles in xxmaj the xxmaj times the other day . xxmaj you take a 
▁ scholarly interest in xxmaj newspeak , i believe ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston had recovered part of his self - possession . ’ hardly scholarly , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ i ’ m only an amateur . xxmaj it ’s not my subject . i have never had anything to do 
▁ with the actual construction of the language . ’ 
▁ ’ but you write it very elegantly , ’ said o’brien . ’ that is not only my own 
▁ opinion . i was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an expert . 
▁ xxmaj his name has slipped my memory for the moment . ’ 
▁ xxmaj again xxmaj winston ’s heart stirred painfully . xxmaj it was inconceivable that this was 
▁ anything other than a reference to xxmaj syme . xxmaj but xxmaj syme was not only dead , he 
▁ was abolished , an unperson . xxmaj any identifiable reference to him would have been 
▁ mortally dangerous . o’brien ’s remark must obviously have been intended as a 
▁ signal , a codeword . xxmaj by sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had turned the 
▁ two of them into accomplices . xxmaj they had continued to stroll slowly down the 
▁ corridor , but now o’brien halted . xxmaj with the curious , disarming friendliness that 
▁ he always managed to put in to the gesture he resettled his spectacles on his 
▁ nose . xxmaj then he went on : 
▁ ’ what i had really intended to say was that in your article i noticed you 
▁ had used two words which have become obsolete . xxmaj but they have only become 
▁ so very recently . xxmaj have you seen the tenth edition of the xxmaj newspeak xxmaj dictionary ? ’ 
▁ ’ no , ’ said xxmaj winston . ’ i did n’t think it had been issued yet . xxmaj we are still using 
▁ the ninth in the xxmaj records xxmaj department . ’ 
▁ ’ the tenth edition is not due to appear for some months , i believe . xxmaj but a 
▁ 92 
▁ few advance copies have been circulated . i have one myself . xxmaj it might interest 
▁ you to look at it , perhaps ? ’ 
▁ ’ very much so , ’ said xxmaj winston , immediately seeing where this tended . 
▁ ’ some of the new developments are most ingenious . xxmaj the reduction in the 
▁ number of verbs — that is the point that will appeal to you , i think . xxmaj let me 
▁ see , shall i send a messenger to you with the dictionary ? xxmaj but i am afraid i 
▁ invariably forget anything of that kind . xxmaj perhaps you could pick it up at my flat 
▁ at some time that suited you ? xxmaj wait . xxmaj let me give you my address . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were standing in front of a telescreen . xxmaj somewhat absentmindedly 
▁ o’brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather - covered notebook and a gold ink - pencil . xxmaj immediately beneath the telescreen , in such a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the instrument could 
▁ read what he was writing , he scribbled an address , tore out the page and handed 
▁ it to xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ i am usually at home in the evenings , ’ he said . ’ if not , my servant will give 
▁ you the dictionary . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he was gone , leaving xxmaj winston holding the scrap of paper , which this time 
▁ there was no need to conceal . xxmaj nevertheless he carefully memorized what was 
▁ written on it , and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along with 
▁ a mass of other papers . 
▁ xxmaj they had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most . 
▁ xxmaj there was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have . xxmaj it had 
▁ been contrived as a way of letting xxmaj winston know o’brien ’s address . xxmaj this was 
▁ necessary , because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to discover 
▁ where anyone lived . xxmaj there were no directories of any kind . ’ if you ever want to 
▁ see me , this is where i can be found , ’ was what o’brien had been saying to him . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps there would even be a message concealed somewhere in the dictionary . 
▁ xxmaj but at any rate , one thing was certain . xxmaj the conspiracy that he had dreamed of 
▁ did exist , and he had reached the outer edges of it . 
▁ xxmaj he knew that sooner or later he would obey o’brien ’s summons . xxmaj perhaps 
▁ tomorrow , perhaps after a long delay — he was not certain . xxmaj what was happening was only the working - out of a process that had started years ago . xxmaj the first 
▁ step had been a secret , involuntary thought , the second had been the opening 
▁ of the diary . xxmaj he had moved from thoughts to words , and now from words to 
▁ actions . xxmaj the last step was something that would happen in the xxmaj ministry of 
▁ xxmaj love . xxmaj he had accepted it . xxmaj the end was contained in the beginning . xxmaj but it was 
▁ frightening : or , more exactly , it was like a foretaste of death , like being a little 
▁ less alive . xxmaj even while he was speaking to o’brien , when the meaning of the 
▁ words had sunk in , a chilly shuddering feeling had taken possession of his body . 
▁ xxmaj he had the sensation of stepping into the dampness of a grave , and it was not 
▁ much better because he had always known that the grave was there and waiting 
▁ for him . 
▁ 93 
▁ xxmaj chapter 15 
▁ xxmaj winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears . xxmaj julia rolled sleepily against 
▁ him , murmuring something that might have been ’ what ’s the matter ? ’ 
▁ ’ i dreamt- ’ he began , and stopped short . xxmaj it was too complex to be put into 
▁ words . xxmaj there was the dream itself , and there was a memory connected with it 
▁ that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking . 
▁ xxmaj he lay back with his eyes shut , still sodden in the atmosphere of the dream . 
▁ xxmaj it was a vast , luminous dream in which his whole life seemed to stretch out 
▁ before him like a landscape on a summer evening after rain . xxmaj it had all occurred 
▁ inside the glass paperweight , but the surface of the glass was the dome of the sky , 
▁ and inside the dome everything was flooded with clear soft light in which one 
▁ could see into interminable distances . xxmaj the dream had also been comprehended 
▁ by — indeed , in some sense it had consisted in — a gesture of the arm made 
▁ by his mother , and made again thirty years later by the xxmaj jewish woman he had 
▁ seen on the news film , trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets , before 
▁ the helicopter blew them both to pieces . 
▁ ’ do you know , ’ he said , ’ that until this moment i believed i had murdered 
▁ my mother ? ’ 
▁ ’ why did you murder her ? ’ said xxmaj julia , almost asleep . 
▁ ’ i did n’t murder her . xxmaj not physically . ’ 
▁ xxmaj in the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother , and within 
▁ a few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all 
▁ come back . xxmaj it was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of his 
▁ consciousness over many years . xxmaj he was not certain of the date , but he could 
▁ not have been less than ten years old , possibly twelve , when it had happened . 
▁ xxmaj his father had disappeared some time earlier , how much earlier he could 
▁ not remember . xxmaj he remembered better the rackety , uneasy circumstances of the 
▁ time : the periodical panics about air - raids and the sheltering in xxmaj tube stations , 
▁ the piles of rubble everywhere , the unintelligible proclamations posted at street 
▁ corners , the gangs of youths in shirts all the same colour , the enormous queues 
▁ outside the bakeries , the intermittent machine - gun fire in the distance — above 
▁ all , the fact that there was never enough to eat . xxmaj he remembered long afternoons 
▁ spent with other boys in scrounging round dustbins and rubbish heaps , picking 
▁ out the ribs of cabbage leaves , potato peelings , sometimes even scraps of stale 
▁ breadcrust from which they carefully scraped away the cinders ; and also in 
▁ waiting for the passing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and were 
▁ known to carry cattle feed , and which , when they jolted over the bad patches 
▁ in the road , sometimes spilt a few fragments of oil - cake . 
▁ 94 
▁ xxmaj when his father disappeared , his mother did not show any surprise or any 
▁ violent grief , but a sudden change came over her . xxmaj she seemed to have become 
▁ completely spiritless . xxmaj it was evident even to xxmaj winston that she was waiting for 
▁ something that she knew must happen . xxmaj she did everything that was needed — 
▁ cooked , washed , mended , made the bed , swept the floor , dusted the mantelpiece 
▁ — always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous motion , like an 
▁ artist ’s lay - figure moving of its own accord . xxmaj her large shapely body seemed 
▁ to relapse naturally into stillness . xxmaj for hours at a time she would sit almost 
▁ immobile on the bed , nursing his young sister , a tiny , ailing , very silent child of 
▁ two or three , with a face made simian by thinness . xxmaj very occasionally she would 
▁ take xxmaj winston in her arms and press him against her for a long time without 
▁ saying anything . xxmaj he was aware , in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness , that 
▁ this was somehow connected with the never - mentioned thing that was about to 
▁ happen . 
▁ xxmaj he remembered the room where they lived , a dark , closesmelling room that 
▁ seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane . xxmaj there was a gas ring in 
▁ the fender , and a shelf where food was kept , and on the landing outside there 
▁ was a brown earthenware sink , common to several rooms . xxmaj he remembered his 
▁ mother ’s statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something in 
▁ a saucepan . xxmaj above all he remembered his continuous hunger , and the fierce 
▁ sordid battles at mealtimes . xxmaj he would ask his mother naggingly , over and over 
▁ again , why there was not more food , he would shout and storm at her ( he even 
▁ remembered the tones of his voice , which was beginning to break prematurely 
▁ and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way ) , or he would attempt a snivelling note 
▁ of pathos in his efforts to get more than his share . xxmaj his mother was quite ready 
▁ to give him more than his share . xxmaj she took it for granted that he , ’ the boy ’ , 
▁ should have the biggest portion ; but however much she gave him he invariably 
▁ demanded more . xxmaj at every meal she would beseech him not to be selfish and to 
▁ remember that his little sister was sick and also needed food , but it was no use . 
▁ xxmaj he would cry out with rage when she stopped ladling , he would try to wrench 
▁ the saucepan and spoon out of her hands , he would grab bits from his sister ’s 
▁ plate . xxmaj he knew that he was starving the other two , but he could not help it ; 
▁ he even felt that he had a right to do it . xxmaj the clamorous hunger in his belly 
▁ seemed to justify him . xxmaj between meals , if his mother did not stand guard , he 
▁ was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf . 
▁ xxmaj one day a chocolate - ration was issued . xxmaj there had been no such issue for 
▁ weeks or months past . xxmaj he remembered quite clearly that precious little morsel 
▁ of chocolate . xxmaj it was a two - ounce slab ( they still talked about ounces in those 
▁ days ) between the three of them . xxmaj it was obvious that it ought to be divided 
▁ into three equal parts . xxmaj suddenly , as though he were listening to somebody else , 
▁ xxmaj winston heard himself demanding in a loud booming voice that he should be 
▁ given the whole piece . xxmaj his mother told him not to be greedy . xxmaj there was a 
▁ long , nagging argument that went round and round , with shouts , whines , tears , 
▁ remonstrances , bargainings . xxmaj his tiny sister , clinging to her mother with both 
▁ hands , exactly like a baby monkey , sat looking over her shoulder at him with 
▁ large , mournful eyes . xxmaj in the end his mother broke off three - quarters of the 
▁ chocolate and gave it to xxmaj winston , giving the other quarter to his sister . xxmaj the 
▁ little girl took hold of it and looked at it dully , perhaps not knowing what it 
▁ was . xxmaj winston stood watching her for a moment . xxmaj then with a sudden swift 
▁ spring he had snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister ’s hand and was 
▁ 95 
▁ fleeing for the door . 
▁ ’ winston , xxmaj winston ! ’ his mother called after him . ’ come back ! xxmaj give your 
▁ sister back her chocolate ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj he stopped , but did not come back . xxmaj his mother ’s anxious eyes were fixed 
▁ on his face . xxmaj even now he was thinking about the thing , he did not know what 
▁ it was that was on the point of happening . xxmaj his sister , conscious of having been 
▁ robbed of something , had set up a feeble wail . xxmaj his mother drew her arm round 
▁ the child and pressed its face against her breast . xxmaj something in the gesture told 
▁ him that his sister was dying . xxmaj he turned and fled down the stairs . with the 
▁ chocolate growing sticky in his hand . 
▁ xxmaj he never saw his mother again . xxmaj after he had devoured the chocolate he felt 
▁ somewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for several hours , 
▁ until hunger drove him home . xxmaj when he came back his mother had disappeared . 
▁ xxmaj this was already becoming normal at that time . xxmaj nothing was gone from the 
▁ room except his mother and his sister . xxmaj they had not taken any clothes , not 
▁ even his mother ’s overcoat . xxmaj to this day he did not know with any certainty 
▁ that his mother was dead . xxmaj it was perfectly possible that she had merely been 
▁ sent to a forced - labour camp . xxmaj as for his sister , she might have been removed , 
▁ like xxmaj winston himself , to one of the colonies for homeless children ( reclamation 
▁ xxmaj centres , they were called ) which had grown up as a result of the civil war , or 
▁ she might have been sent to the labour camp along with his mother , or simply 
▁ left somewhere or other to die . 
▁ xxmaj the dream was still vivid in his mind , especially the enveloping protecting 
▁ gesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained . xxmaj his 
▁ mind went back to another dream of two months ago . xxmaj exactly as his mother 
▁ had sat on the dingy whitequilted bed , with the child clinging to her , so she had 
▁ sat in the sunken ship , far underneath him , and drowning deeper every minute , 
▁ but still looking up at him through the darkening water . 
▁ xxmaj he told xxmaj julia the story of his mother ’s disappearance . xxmaj without opening her 
▁ eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position . 
▁ ’ i expect you were a beastly little swine in those days , ’ she said indistinctly . 
▁ ’ all children are swine . ’ 
▁ ’ yes . xxmaj but the real point of the story- ’ 
▁ xxmaj from her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again . xxmaj he 
▁ would have liked to continue talking about his mother . xxmaj he did not suppose , 
▁ from what he could remember of her , that she had been an unusual woman , 
▁ still less an intelligent one ; and yet she had possessed a kind of nobility , a kind 
▁ of purity , simply because the standards that she obeyed were private ones . xxmaj her 
▁ feelings were her own , and could not be altered from outside . xxmaj it would not have 
▁ occurred to her that an action which is ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless . 
▁ xxmaj if you loved someone , you loved him , and when you had nothing else to give , 
▁ you still gave him love . xxmaj when the last of the chocolate was gone , his mother 
▁ had clasped the child in her arms . xxmaj it was no use , it changed nothing , it did not 
▁ produce more chocolate , it did not avert the child ’s death or her own ; but it 
▁ seemed natural to her to do it . xxmaj the refugee woman in the boat had also covered 
▁ the little boy with her arm , which was no more use against the bullets than 
▁ a sheet of paper . xxmaj the terrible thing that the xxmaj party had done was to persuade 
▁ you that mere impulses , mere feelings , were of no account , while at the same 
▁ time robbing you of all power over the material world . xxmaj when once you were in 
▁ the grip of the xxmaj party , what you felt or did not feel , what you did or refrained 
▁ 96 
▁ from doing , made literally no difference . xxmaj whatever happened you vanished , and 
▁ neither you nor your actions were ever heard of again . xxmaj you were lifted clean out 
▁ of the stream of history . xxmaj and yet to the people of only two generations ago this 
▁ would not have seemed all - important , because they were not attempting to alter 
▁ history . xxmaj they were governed by private loyalties which they did not question . 
▁ xxmaj what mattered were individual relationships , and a completely helpless gesture , 
▁ an embrace , a tear , a word spoken to a dying man , could have value in itself . 
▁ xxmaj the proles , it suddenly occurred to him , had remained in this condition . xxmaj they 
▁ were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea , they were loyal to one another . 
▁ xxmaj for the first time in his life he did not despise the proles or think of them merely 
▁ as an inert force which would one day spring to life and regenerate the world . 
▁ xxmaj the proles had stayed human . xxmaj they had not become hardened inside . xxmaj they had 
▁ held on to the primitive emotions which he himself had to re - learn by conscious 
▁ effort . xxmaj and in thinking this he remembered , without apparent relevance , how 
▁ a few weeks ago he had seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had 
▁ kicked it into the gutter as though it had been a cabbage - stalk . 
▁ ’ the proles are human beings , ’ he said aloud . ’ we are not human . ’ 
▁ ’ why not ? ’ said xxmaj julia , who had woken up again . 
▁ xxmaj he thought for a little while . ’ has it ever occurred to you . he said , ’ that the 
▁ best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here before it ’s too late , 
▁ and never see each other again ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , dear , it has occurred to me , several times . xxmaj but xxmaj i ’ m not going to do it , 
▁ all the same . ’ 
▁ ’ we ’ ve been lucky , ’ he said ’ but it ca n’t last much longer . xxmaj you ’re young . 
▁ xxmaj you look normal and innocent . xxmaj if you keep clear of people like me , you might 
▁ stay alive for another fifty years . ’ 
▁ ’ no . xxmaj i ’ ve thought it all out . xxmaj what you do , xxmaj i ’ m going to do . xxmaj and do n’t be 
▁ too downhearted . xxmaj i ’ m rather good at staying alive . ’ 
▁ ’ we may be together for another six months — a year — there ’s no knowing . 
▁ xxmaj at the end we ’re certain to be apart . xxmaj do you realize how utterly alone we shall 
▁ be ? xxmaj when once they get hold of us there will be nothing , literally nothing , that 
▁ either of us can do for the other . xxmaj if i confess , they ’ll shoot you , and if i refuse to 
▁ confess , they ’ll shoot you just the same . xxmaj nothing that i can do or say , or stop 
▁ myself from saying , will put off your death for as much as five minutes . xxmaj neither 
▁ of us will even know whether the other is alive or dead . xxmaj we shall be utterly 
▁ without power of any kind . xxmaj the one thing that matters is that we should n’t 
▁ betray one another , although even that ca n’t make the slightest difference . ’ 
▁ ’ if you mean confessing , ’ she said , ’ we shall do that , right enough . xxmaj everybody 
▁ always confesses . xxmaj you ca n’t help it . xxmaj they torture you . ’ 
▁ ’ i do n’t mean confessing . xxmaj confession is not betrayal . xxmaj what you say or do 
▁ does n’t matter : only feelings matter . xxmaj if they could make me stop loving you — 
▁ that would be the real betrayal . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she thought it over . ’ they ca n’t do that , ’ she said finally . ’ it ’s the one thing 
▁ they ca n’t do . xxmaj they can make you say anything — anything — but they ca n’t 
▁ make you believe it . xxmaj they ca n’t get inside you . ’ 
▁ ’ no , ’ he said a little more hopefully , ’ no ; that ’s quite true . xxmaj they ca n’t get 
▁ inside you . xxmaj if you can feel that staying human is worth while , even when it ca n’t 
▁ have any result whatever , you ’ ve beaten them . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he thought of the telescreen with its never - sleeping ear . xxmaj they could spy 
▁ upon you night and day , but if you kept your head you could still outwit them . 
▁ 97 
▁ xxmaj with all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret of finding out what 
▁ another human being was thinking . xxmaj perhaps that was less true when you were 
▁ actually in their hands . xxmaj one did not know what happened inside the xxmaj ministry 
▁ of xxmaj love , but it was possible to guess : tortures , drugs , delicate instruments 
▁ that registered your nervous reactions , gradual wearing - down by sleeplessness 
▁ and solitude and persistent questioning . xxmaj facts , at any rate , could not be kept 
▁ hidden . xxmaj they could be tracked down by enquiry , they could be squeezed out of 
▁ you by torture . xxmaj but if the object was not to stay alive but to stay human , what 
▁ difference did it ultimately make ? xxmaj they could not alter your feelings : for that 
▁ matter you could not alter them yourself , even if you wanted to . xxmaj they could 
▁ lay bare in the utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought ; 
▁ but the inner heart , whose workings were mysterious even to yourself , remained 
▁ impregnable . 
▁ 98 
▁ xxmaj chapter 16 
▁ xxmaj they had done it , they had done it at last ! 
▁ xxmaj the room they were standing in was long - shaped and softly lit . xxmaj the telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur ; the richness of the dark - blue carpet gave 
▁ one the impression of treading on velvet . xxmaj at the far end of the room o’brien 
▁ was sitting at a table under a green - shaded lamp , with a mass of papers on 
▁ either side of him . xxmaj he had not bothered to look up when the servant showed 
▁ xxmaj julia and xxmaj winston in . 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would 
▁ be able to speak . xxmaj they had done it , they had done it at last , was all he could 
▁ think . xxmaj it had been a rash act to come here at all , and sheer folly to arrive 
▁ together ; though it was true that they had come by different routes and only 
▁ met on o’brien ’s doorstep . xxmaj but merely to walk into such a place needed an 
▁ effort of the nerve . xxmaj it was only on very rare occasions that one saw inside 
▁ the dwelling - places of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , or even penetrated into the quarter of 
▁ the town where they lived . xxmaj the whole atmosphere of the huge block of flats , 
▁ the richness and spaciousness of everything , the unfamiliar smells of good food 
▁ and good tobacco , the silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down , 
▁ the white - jacketed servants hurrying to and fro — everything was intimidating . 
▁ xxmaj although he had a good pretext for coming here , he was haunted at every step 
▁ by the fear that a black - uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round 
▁ the corner , demand his papers , and order him to get out . o’brien ’s servant , 
▁ however , had admitted the two of them without demur . xxmaj he was a small , darkhaired man in a white jacket , with a diamond - shaped , completely expressionless 
▁ face which might have been that of a xxmaj chinese . xxmaj the passage down which he led 
▁ them was softly carpeted , with cream - papered walls and white wainscoting , all 
▁ exquisitely clean . xxmaj that too was intimidating . xxmaj winston could not remember 
▁ ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not grimy from the contact of 
▁ human bodies . 
▁ o’brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying 
▁ it intently . xxmaj his heavy face , bent down so that one could see the line of the 
▁ nose , looked both formidable and intelligent . xxmaj for perhaps twenty seconds he sat 
▁ without stirring . xxmaj then he pulled the speakwrite towards him and rapped out a 
▁ message in the hybrid jargon of the xxmaj ministries : 
▁ ’ items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop unproceed 
▁ constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery overheads stop end 
▁ message . ’ 
▁ 99 
▁ xxmaj he rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the soundless carpet . a little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen away from 
▁ him with the xxmaj newspeak words , but his expression was grimmer than usual , as 
▁ though he were not pleased at being disturbed . xxmaj the terror that xxmaj winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary embarrassment . 
▁ xxmaj it seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a stupid mistake . xxmaj for 
▁ what evidence had he in reality that o’brien was any kind of political conspirator ? xxmaj nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single equivocal remark : beyond 
▁ that , only his own secret imaginings , founded on a dream . xxmaj he could not even 
▁ fall back on the pretence that he had come to borrow the dictionary , because 
▁ in that case xxmaj julia ’s presence was impossible to explain . xxmaj as o’brien passed the 
▁ telescreen a thought seemed to strike him . xxmaj he stopped , turned aside and pressed 
▁ a switch on the wall . xxmaj there was a sharp snap . xxmaj the voice had stopped . 
▁ xxmaj julia uttered a tiny sound , a sort of squeak of surprise . xxmaj even in the midst 
▁ of his panic , xxmaj winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his tongue . 
▁ ’ you can turn it off ! ’ he said . 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said o’brien , ’ we can turn it off . xxmaj we have that privilege . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he was opposite them now . xxmaj his solid form towered over the pair of them , 
▁ and the expression on his face was still indecipherable . xxmaj he was waiting , somewhat sternly , for xxmaj winston to speak , but about what ? xxmaj even now it was quite 
▁ conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he had 
▁ been interrupted . xxmaj nobody spoke . xxmaj after the stopping of the telescreen the room 
▁ seemed deadly silent . xxmaj the seconds marched past , enormous . xxmaj with difficulty 
▁ xxmaj winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on o’brien ’s . xxmaj then suddenly the grim 
▁ face broke down into what might have been the beginnings of a smile . xxmaj with his 
▁ characteristic gesture o’brien resettled his spectacles on his nose . 
▁ ’ shall i say it , or will you ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ i will say it , ’ said xxmaj winston promptly . ’ that thing is really turned off ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , everything is turned off . xxmaj we are alone . ’ 
▁ ’ we have come here because- ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused , realizing for the first time the vagueness of his own motives . 
▁ xxmaj since he did not in fact know what kind of help he expected from o’brien , it 
▁ was not easy to say why he had come here . xxmaj he went on , conscious that what 
▁ he was saying must sound both feeble and pretentious : 
▁ ’ we believe that there is some kind of conspiracy , some kind of secret organization working against the xxmaj party , and that you are involved in it . xxmaj we want 
▁ to join it and work for it . xxmaj we are enemies of the xxmaj party . xxmaj we disbelieve in the 
▁ principles of xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj we are thought - criminals . xxmaj we are also adulterers . i tell 
▁ you this because we want to put ourselves at your mercy . xxmaj if you want us to 
▁ incriminate ourselves in any other way , we are ready . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he stopped and glanced over his shoulder , with the feeling that the door 
▁ had opened . xxmaj sure enough , the little yellow - faced servant had come in without 
▁ knocking . xxmaj winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter and glasses . 
▁ ’ martin is one of us , ’ said o’brien impassively . ’ bring the drinks over here , 
▁ xxmaj martin . xxmaj put them on the round table . xxmaj have we enough chairs ? xxmaj then we may 
▁ as well sit down and talk in comfort . xxmaj bring a chair for yourself , xxmaj martin . xxmaj this is 
▁ business . xxmaj you can stop being a servant for the next ten minutes . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the little man sat down , quite at his ease , and yet still with a servant - like 
▁ air , the air of a valet enjoying a privilege . xxmaj winston regarded him out of the 
▁ corner of his eye . xxmaj it struck him that the man ’s whole life was playing a part , 
▁ 100 
▁ and that he felt it to be dangerous to drop his assumed personality even for a 
▁ moment . o’brien took the decanter by the neck and filled up the glasses with 
▁ a dark - red liquid . xxmaj it aroused in xxmaj winston dim memories of something seen long 
▁ ago on a wall or a hoarding — a vast bottle composed of electric lights which 
▁ seemed to move up and down and pour its contents into a glass . xxmaj seen from the 
▁ top the stuff looked almost black , but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby . xxmaj it 
▁ had a sour - sweet smell . xxmaj he saw xxmaj julia pick up her glass and sniff at it with frank 
▁ curiosity . 
▁ ’ it is called wine , ’ said o’brien with a faint smile . ’ you will have read about 
▁ it in books , no doubt . xxmaj not much of it gets to the xxmaj outer xxmaj party , i am afraid . ’ 
▁ xxmaj his face grew solemn again , and he raised his glass : ’ i think it is fitting that we 
▁ should begin by drinking a health . xxmaj to our xxmaj leader : xxmaj to xxmaj emmanuel xxmaj goldstein . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness . xxmaj wine was a thing he 
▁ had read and dreamed about . xxmaj like the glass paperweight or xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s 
▁ half - remembered rhymes , it belonged to the vanished , romantic past , the olden 
▁ time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts . xxmaj for some reason he had always 
▁ thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste , like that of blackberry jam 
▁ and an immediate intoxicating effect . xxmaj actually , when he came to swallow it , the 
▁ stuff was distinctly disappointing . xxmaj the truth was that after years of gin - drinking 
▁ he could barely taste it . xxmaj he set down the empty glass . 
▁ ’ then there is such a person as xxmaj goldstein ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ yes , there is such a person , and he is alive . xxmaj where , i do not know . ’ 
▁ ’ and the conspiracy — the organization ? xxmaj is it real ? xxmaj it is not simply an 
▁ invention of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police ? ’ 
▁ ’ no , it is real . xxmaj the xxmaj brotherhood , we call it . xxmaj you will never learn much more 
▁ about the xxmaj brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it . i will 
▁ come back to that presently . ’ xxmaj he looked at his wrist - watch . ’ it is unwise even 
▁ for members of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party to turn off the telescreen for more than half an 
▁ hour . xxmaj you ought not to have come here together , and you will have to leave 
▁ separately . xxmaj you , comrade ’ — he bowed his head to xxmaj julia — ’ will leave first . xxmaj we 
▁ have about twenty minutes at our disposal . xxmaj you will understand that i must 
▁ start by asking you certain questions . xxmaj in general terms , what are you prepared 
▁ to do ? ’ 
▁ ’ anything that we are capable of , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facing xxmaj winston . 
▁ xxmaj he almost ignored xxmaj julia , seeming to take it for granted that xxmaj winston could speak 
▁ for her . xxmaj for a moment the lids flitted down over his eyes . xxmaj he began asking his 
▁ questions in a low , expressionless voice , as though this were a routine , a sort of 
▁ catechism , most of whose answers were known to him already . 
▁ ’ you are prepared to give your lives ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you are prepared to commit murder ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ to commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hundreds of 
▁ innocent people ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ to betray your country to foreign powers ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you are prepared to cheat , to forge , to blackmail , to corrupt the minds of 
▁ children , to distribute habit - forming drugs , to encourage prostitution , to dissem101 
▁ inate venereal diseases — to do anything which is likely to cause demoralization 
▁ and weaken the power of the xxmaj party ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ if , for example , it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric 
▁ acid in a child ’s face — are you prepared to do that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life as a 
▁ waiter or a dock - worker ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you are prepared to commit suicide , if and when we order you to do so ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ you are prepared , the two of you , to separate and never see one another 
▁ again ? ’ 
▁ ’ no ! ’ broke in xxmaj julia . 
▁ xxmaj it appeared to xxmaj winston that a long time passed before he answered . xxmaj for 
▁ a moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech . xxmaj his 
▁ tongue worked soundlessly , forming the opening syllables first of one word , then 
▁ of the other , over and over again . xxmaj until he had said it , he did not know which 
▁ word he was going to say . ’ no , ’ he said finally . 
▁ ’ you did well to tell me , ’ said o’brien . ’ it is necessary for us to know 
▁ everything . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he turned himself toward xxmaj julia and added in a voice with somewhat more 
▁ expression in it : 
▁ ’ do you understand that even if he survives , it may be as a different person ? 
▁ xxmaj we may be obliged to give him a new identity . xxmaj his face , his movements , the 
▁ shape of his hands , the colour of his hair — even his voice would be different . 
▁ xxmaj and you yourself might have become a different person . xxmaj our surgeons can 
▁ alter people beyond recognition . xxmaj sometimes it is necessary . xxmaj sometimes we even 
▁ amputate a limb . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at xxmaj martin ’s xxmaj mongolian face . xxmaj there were no scars that he could see . xxmaj julia had turned a shade 
▁ paler , so that her freckles were showing , but she faced o’brien boldly . xxmaj she 
▁ murmured something that seemed to be assent . 
▁ ’ good . xxmaj then that is settled . ’ 
▁ xxmaj there was a silver box of cigarettes on the table . xxmaj with a rather absentminded air o’brien pushed them towards the others , took one himself , then 
▁ stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro , as though he could think better 
▁ standing . xxmaj they were very good cigarettes , very thick and well - packed , with an 
▁ unfamiliar silkiness in the paper . o’brien looked at his wrist - watch again . 
▁ ’ you had better go back to your xxmaj pantry , xxmaj martin , ’ he said . ’ i shall switch on 
▁ in a quarter of an hour . xxmaj take a good look at these comrades ’ faces before you 
▁ go . xxmaj you will be seeing them again . i may not . 
▁ xxmaj exactly as they had done at the front door , the little man ’s dark eyes flickered 
▁ over their faces . xxmaj there was not a trace of friendliness in his manner . xxmaj he was 
▁ memorizing their appearance , but he felt no interest in them , or appeared to 
▁ feel none . xxmaj it occurred to xxmaj winston that a synthetic face was perhaps incapable 
▁ of changing its expression . xxmaj without speaking or giving any kind of salutation , 
▁ xxmaj martin went out , closing the door silently behind him . o’brien was strolling up 
▁ and down , one hand in the pocket of his black overalls , the other holding his 
▁ cigarette . 
▁ 102 
▁ ’ you understand , ’ he said , ’ that you will be fighting in the dark . xxmaj you will 
▁ always be in the dark . xxmaj you will receive orders and you will obey them , without 
▁ knowing why . xxmaj later i shall send you a book from which you will learn the true 
▁ nature of the society we live in , and the strategy by which we shall destroy it . 
▁ xxmaj when you have read the book , you will be full members of the xxmaj brotherhood . 
▁ xxmaj but between the general aims that we are fighting for and the immediate tasks 
▁ of the moment , you will never know anything . i tell you that the xxmaj brotherhood 
▁ exists , but i can not tell you whether it numbers a hundred members , or ten 
▁ million . xxmaj from your personal knowledge you will never be able to say that it 
▁ numbers even as many as a dozen . xxmaj you will have three or four contacts , who 
▁ will be renewed from time to time as they disappear . xxmaj as this was your first 
▁ contact , it will be preserved . xxmaj when you receive orders , they will come from 
▁ me . xxmaj if we find it necessary to communicate with you , it will be through xxmaj martin . 
▁ xxmaj when you are finally caught , you will confess . xxmaj that is unavoidable . xxmaj but you 
▁ will have very little to confess , other than your own actions . xxmaj you will not be 
▁ able to betray more than a handful of unimportant people . xxmaj probably you will 
▁ not even betray me . xxmaj by that time i may be dead , or i shall have become a 
▁ different person , with a different face . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet . xxmaj in spite of the bulkiness 
▁ of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements . xxmaj it came out even 
▁ in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket , or manipulated a 
▁ cigarette . xxmaj more even than of strength , he gave an impression of confidence and 
▁ of an understanding tinged by irony . xxmaj however much in earnest he might be , he 
▁ had nothing of the single - mindedness that belongs to a fanatic . xxmaj when he spoke 
▁ of murder , suicide , venereal disease , amputated limbs , and altered faces , it was 
▁ with a faint air of persiflage . ’ this is unavoidable , ’ his voice seemed to say ; 
▁ ’ this is what we have got to do , unflinchingly . xxmaj but this is not what we shall be 
▁ doing when life is worth living again . ’ a wave of admiration , almost of worship , 
▁ flowed out from xxmaj winston towards o’brien . xxmaj for the moment he had forgotten the 
▁ shadowy figure of xxmaj goldstein . xxmaj when you looked at o’brien ’s powerful shoulders 
▁ and his blunt - featured face , so ugly and yet so civilized , it was impossible to 
▁ believe that he could be defeated . xxmaj there was no stratagem that he was not equal 
▁ to , no danger that he could not foresee . xxmaj even xxmaj julia seemed to be impressed . 
▁ xxmaj she had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently . o’brien went on : 
▁ ’ you will have heard rumours of the existence of the xxmaj brotherhood . xxmaj no doubt 
▁ you have formed your own picture of it . xxmaj you have imagined , probably , a huge 
▁ underworld of conspirators , meeting secretly in cellars , scribbling messages on 
▁ walls , recognizing one another by codewords or by special movements of the 
▁ hand . xxmaj nothing of the kind exists . xxmaj the members of the xxmaj brotherhood have no 
▁ way of recognizing one another , and it is impossible for any one member to 
▁ be aware of the identity of more than a few others . xxmaj goldstein himself , if he 
▁ fell into the hands of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , could not give them a complete list 
▁ of members , or any information that would lead them to a complete list . xxmaj no 
▁ such list exists . xxmaj the xxmaj brotherhood can not be wiped out because it is not an 
▁ organization in the ordinary sense . xxmaj nothing holds it together except an idea 
▁ which is indestructible . xxmaj you will never have anything to sustain you , except the 
▁ idea . xxmaj you will get no comradeship and no encouragement . xxmaj when finally you 
▁ are caught , you will get no help . xxmaj we never help our members . xxmaj at most , when 
▁ it is absolutely necessary that someone should be silenced , we are occasionally 
▁ able to smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner ’s cell . xxmaj you will have to get used 
▁ 103 
▁ to living without results and without hope . xxmaj you will work for a while , you will 
▁ be caught , you will confess , and then you will die . xxmaj those are the only results 
▁ that you will ever see . xxmaj there is no possibility that any perceptible change will 
▁ happen within our own lifetime . xxmaj we are the dead . xxmaj our only true life is in the 
▁ future . xxmaj we shall take part in it as handfuls of dust and splinters of bone . xxmaj but 
▁ how far away that future may be , there is no knowing . xxmaj it might be a thousand 
▁ years . xxmaj at present nothing is possible except to extend the area of sanity little by 
▁ little . xxmaj we can not act collectively . xxmaj we can only spread our knowledge outwards 
▁ from individual to individual , generation after generation . xxmaj in the face of the 
▁ xxmaj thought xxmaj police there is no other way . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he halted and looked for the third time at his wrist - watch . 
▁ ’ it is almost time for you to leave , comrade , ’ he said to xxmaj julia . ’ wait . xxmaj the 
▁ decanter is still half full . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem . 
▁ ’ what shall it be this time ? ’ he said , still with the same faint suggestion of 
▁ irony . ’ to the confusion of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police ? xxmaj to the death of xxmaj big xxmaj brother ? 
▁ xxmaj to humanity ? xxmaj to the future ? ’ 
▁ ’ to the past , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ the past is more important , ’ agreed o’brien gravely . 
▁ xxmaj they emptied their glasses , and a moment later xxmaj julia stood up to go . o’brien 
▁ took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat white tablet 
▁ which he told her to place on her tongue . xxmaj it was important , he said , not to go 
▁ out smelling of wine : the lift attendants were very observant . xxmaj as soon as the 
▁ door had shut behind her he appeared to forget her existence . xxmaj he took another 
▁ pace or two up and down , then stopped . 
▁ ’ there are details to be settled , ’ he said . ’ i assume that you have a hidingplace of some kind ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston explained about the room over xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s shop . 
▁ ’ that will do for the moment . xxmaj later we will arrange something else for you . 
▁ xxmaj it is important to change one ’s hiding - place frequently . xxmaj meanwhile i shall send 
▁ you a copy of the book ’ — even o’brien , xxmaj winston noticed , seemed to pronounce 
▁ the words as though they were in italics- ’ goldstein ’s book , you understand , as 
▁ soon as possible . xxmaj it may be some days before i can get hold of one . xxmaj there 
▁ are not many in existence , as you can imagine . xxmaj the xxmaj thought xxmaj police hunt them 
▁ down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce them . xxmaj it makes very 
▁ little difference . xxmaj the book is indestructible . xxmaj if the last copy were gone , we could 
▁ reproduce it almost word for word . xxmaj do you carry a brief - case to work with you ? ’ 
▁ he added . 
▁ ’ as a rule , yes . ’ 
▁ ’ what is it like ? ’ 
▁ ’ black , very shabby . xxmaj with two straps . ’ 
▁ ’ black , two straps , very shabby — good . xxmaj one day in the fairly near futurei can not give a date — one of the messages among your morning ’s work will 
▁ contain a misprinted word , and you will have to ask for a repeat . xxmaj on the 
▁ following day you will go to work without your brief - case . xxmaj at some time during 
▁ the day , in the street , a man will touch you on the arm and say ” i think you have 
▁ dropped your brief - case . ” xxmaj the one he gives you will contain a copy of xxmaj goldstein ’s 
▁ book . xxmaj you will return it within fourteen days . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were silent for a moment . 
▁ 104 
▁ ’ there are a couple of minutes before you need go , ’ said o’brien . ’ we shall 
▁ meet again — if we do meet again- ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston looked up at him . ’ in the place where there is no darkness ? ’ he 
▁ said hesitantly . 
▁ o’brien nodded without appearance of surprise . ’ in the place where there 
▁ is no darkness , ’ he said , as though he had recognized the allusion . ’ and in 
▁ the meantime , is there anything that you wish to say before you leave ? xxmaj any 
▁ message ? xxmaj any question ? . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston thought . xxmaj there did not seem to be any further question that he 
▁ wanted to ask : still less did he feel any impulse to utter high - sounding generalities . xxmaj instead of anything directly connected with o’brien or the xxmaj brotherhood , 
▁ there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of the dark bedroom where 
▁ his mother had spent her last days , and the little room over xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s 
▁ shop , and the glass paperweight , and the steel engraving in its rosewood frame . 
▁ xxmaj almost at random he said : 
▁ ’ did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins ” oranges and lemons , 
▁ say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s ” ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj again o’brien nodded . xxmaj with a sort of grave courtesy he completed the 
▁ stanza : 
▁ ’ oranges and lemons , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj clement ’s , 
▁ xxmaj you owe me three farthings , say the bells of xxmaj st xxmaj martin ’s , 
▁ xxmaj when will you pay me ? say the bells of xxmaj old xxmaj bailey 
▁ xxmaj when i grow rich , say the bells of xxmaj shoreditch . ’ 
▁ ’ you knew the last line ! ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ yes , i knew the last line . xxmaj and now , i am afraid , it is time for you to go . 
▁ xxmaj but wait . xxmaj you had better let me give you one of these tablets . ’ 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj winston stood up o’brien held out a hand . xxmaj his powerful grip crushed 
▁ the bones of xxmaj winston ’s palm . xxmaj at the door xxmaj winston looked back , but o’brien 
▁ seemed already to be in process of putting him out of mind . xxmaj he was waiting 
▁ with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen . xxmaj beyond him xxmaj winston 
▁ could see the writing - table with its green- shaded lamp and the speakwrite and 
▁ the wire baskets deep - laden with papers . xxmaj the incident was closed . xxmaj within 
▁ thirty seconds , it occurred to him , o’brien would be back at his interrupted 
▁ and important work on behalf of the xxmaj party . 
▁ 105 
▁ xxmaj chapter 17 
▁ xxmaj winston was gelatinous with fatigue . xxmaj gelatinous was the right word . xxmaj it had 
▁ come into his head spontaneously . xxmaj his body seemed to have not only the weakness of a jelly , but its translucency . xxmaj he felt that if he held up his hand he would 
▁ be able to see the light through it . xxmaj all the blood and lymph had been drained 
▁ out of him by an enormous debauch of work , leaving only a frail structure of 
▁ nerves , bones , and skin . xxmaj all sensations seemed to be magnified . xxmaj his overalls 
▁ fretted his shoulders , the pavement tickled his feet , even the opening and closing 
▁ of a hand was an effort that made his joints creak . 
▁ xxmaj he had worked more than ninety hours in five days . xxmaj so had everyone else in 
▁ the xxmaj ministry . xxmaj now it was all over , and he had literally nothing to do , no xxmaj party 
▁ work of any description , until tomorrow morning . xxmaj he could spend six hours in 
▁ the hiding - place and another nine in his own bed . xxmaj slowly , in mild afternoon 
▁ sunshine , he walked up a dingy street in the direction of xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s 
▁ shop , keeping one eye open for the patrols , but irrationally convinced that this 
▁ afternoon there was no danger of anyone interfering with him . xxmaj the heavy briefcase that he was carrying bumped against his knee at each step , sending a 
▁ tingling sensation up and down the skin of his leg . xxmaj inside it was the book , 
▁ which he had now had in his possession for six days and had not yet opened , 
▁ nor even looked at . 
▁ xxmaj on the sixth day of xxmaj hate xxmaj week , after the processions , the speeches , the 
▁ shouting , the singing , the banners , the posters , the films , the waxworks , the 
▁ rolling of drums and squealing of trumpets , the tramp of marching feet , the 
▁ grinding of the caterpillars of tanks , the roar of massed planes , the booming 
▁ of guns — after six days of this , when the great orgasm was quivering to its 
▁ climax and the general hatred of xxmaj eurasia had boiled up into such delirium that 
▁ if the crowd could have got their hands on the 2 , xxrep 3 0 xxmaj eurasian war - criminals 
▁ who were to be publicly hanged on the last day of the proceedings , they would 
▁ unquestionably have torn them to pieces — at just this moment it had been 
▁ announced that xxmaj oceania was not after all at war with xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj oceania was at 
▁ war with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj eurasia was an ally . 
▁ xxmaj there was , of course , no admission that any change had taken place . xxmaj merely 
▁ it became known , with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once , that xxmaj eastasia and not xxmaj eurasia was the enemy . xxmaj winston was taking part in a demonstration 
▁ in one of the central xxmaj london squares at the moment when it happened . xxmaj it was 
▁ night , and the white faces and the scarlet banners were luridly floodlit . xxmaj the 
▁ square was packed with several thousand people , including a block of about a 
▁ thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of the xxmaj spies . xxmaj on a scarlet - draped plat106 
▁ form an orator of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , a small lean man with disproportionately 
▁ long arms and a large bald skull over which a few lank locks straggled , was 
▁ haranguing the crowd . a little xxmaj rumpelstiltskin figure , contorted with hatred , 
▁ he gripped the neck of the microphone with one hand while the other , enormous 
▁ at the end of a bony arm , clawed the air menacingly above his head . xxmaj his voice , 
▁ made metallic by the amplifiers , boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities , massacres , deportations , lootings , rapings , torture of prisoners , bombing of 
▁ civilians , lying propaganda , unjust aggressions , broken treaties . xxmaj it was almost 
▁ impossible to listen to him without being first convinced and then maddened . 
▁ xxmaj at every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the voice of the 
▁ speaker was drowned by a wild beast - like roaring that rose uncontrollably from 
▁ thousands of throats . xxmaj the most savage yells of all came from the schoolchildren . 
▁ xxmaj the speech had been proceeding for perhaps twenty minutes when a messenger 
▁ hurried on to the platform and a scrap of paper was slipped into the speaker ’s 
▁ hand . xxmaj he unrolled and read it without pausing in his speech . xxmaj nothing altered 
▁ in his voice or manner , or in the content of what he was saying , but suddenly 
▁ the names were different . xxmaj without words said , a wave of understanding rippled 
▁ through the crowd . xxmaj oceania was at war with xxmaj eastasia ! xxmaj the next moment there 
▁ was a tremendous commotion . xxmaj the banners and posters with which the square 
▁ was decorated were all wrong ! xxmaj quite half of them had the wrong faces on them . 
▁ xxmaj it was sabotage ! xxmaj the agents of xxmaj goldstein had been at work ! xxmaj there was a riotous 
▁ interlude while posters were ripped from the walls , banners torn to shreds and 
▁ trampled underfoot . xxmaj the xxmaj spies performed prodigies of activity in clambering 
▁ over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from the chimneys . 
▁ xxmaj but within two or three minutes it was all over . xxmaj the orator , still gripping the 
▁ neck of the microphone , his shoulders hunched forward , his free hand clawing at 
▁ the air , had gone straight on with his speech . xxmaj one minute more , and the feral 
▁ roars of rage were again bursting from the crowd . xxmaj the xxmaj hate continued exactly 
▁ as before , except that the target had been changed . 
▁ xxmaj the thing that impressed xxmaj winston in looking back was that the speaker had 
▁ switched from one line to the other actually in midsentence , not only without a 
▁ pause , but without even breaking the syntax . xxmaj but at the moment he had other 
▁ things to preoccupy him . xxmaj it was during the moment of disorder while the posters 
▁ were being torn down that a man whose face he did not see had tapped him 
▁ on the shoulder and said , ’ excuse me , i think you ’ ve dropped your brief - case . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he took the brief - case abstractedly , without speaking . xxmaj he knew that it would 
▁ be days before he had an opportunity to look inside it . xxmaj the instant that the 
▁ demonstration was over he went straight to the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth , though the 
▁ time was now nearly twenty - three hours . xxmaj the entire staff of the xxmaj ministry had 
▁ done likewise . xxmaj the orders already issuing from the telescreen , recalling them to 
▁ their posts , were hardly necessary . 
▁ xxmaj oceania was at war with xxmaj eastasia : xxmaj oceania had always been at war with 
▁ xxmaj eastasia . a large part of the political literature of five years was now completely obsolete . xxmaj reports and records of all kinds , newspapers , books , pamphlets , films , sound - tracks , photographs — all had to be rectified at lightning 
▁ speed . xxmaj although no directive was ever issued , it was known that the chiefs of the 
▁ xxmaj department intended that within one week no reference to the war with xxmaj eurasia , or the alliance with xxmaj eastasia , should remain in existence anywhere . xxmaj the 
▁ work was overwhelming , all the more so because the processes that it involved 
▁ could not be called by their true names . xxmaj everyone in the xxmaj records xxmaj department 
▁ 107 
▁ worked eighteen hours in the twenty - four , with two three - hour snatches of sleep . 
▁ xxmaj mattresses were brought up from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors : 
▁ meals consisted of sandwiches and xxmaj victory xxmaj coffee wheeled round on trolleys by 
▁ attendants from the canteen . xxmaj each time that xxmaj winston broke off for one of his 
▁ spells of sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work , and each time that he 
▁ crawled back sticky - eyed and aching , it was to find that another shower of paper 
▁ cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift , halfburying the speakwrite and 
▁ overflowing on to the floor , so that the first job was always to stack them into 
▁ a neat enough pile to give him room to work . xxmaj what was worst of all was that 
▁ the work was by no means purely mechanical . xxmaj often it was enough merely to 
▁ substitute one name for another , but any detailed report of events demanded 
▁ care and imagination . xxmaj even the geographical knowledge that one needed in 
▁ transferring the war from one part of the world to another was considerable . 
▁ xxmaj by the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping 
▁ every few minutes . xxmaj it was like struggling with some crushing physical task , 
▁ something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless 
▁ neurotically anxious to accomplish . xxmaj in so far as he had time to remember it , he 
▁ was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the speakwrite , 
▁ every stroke of his ink - pencil , was a deliberate lie . xxmaj he was as anxious as anyone 
▁ else in the xxmaj department that the forgery should be perfect . xxmaj on the morning 
▁ of the sixth day the dribble of cylinders slowed down . xxmaj for as much as half 
▁ an hour nothing came out of the tube ; then one more cylinder , then nothing . 
▁ xxmaj everywhere at about the same time the work was easing off . a deep and as 
▁ it were secret sigh went through the xxmaj department . a mighty deed , which could 
▁ never be mentioned , had been achieved . xxmaj it was now impossible for any human 
▁ being to prove by documentary evidence that the war with xxmaj eurasia had ever 
▁ happened . xxmaj at twelve hundred it was unexpectedly announced that all workers 
▁ in the xxmaj ministry were free till tomorrow morning . xxmaj winston , still carrying the 
▁ brief - case containing the book , which had remained between his feet while he 
▁ worked and under his body while he slept , went home , shaved himself , and 
▁ almost fell asleep in his bath , although the water was barely more than tepid . 
▁ xxmaj with a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above 
▁ xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s shop . xxmaj he was tired , but not sleepy any longer . xxmaj he opened 
▁ the window , lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for coffee . 
▁ xxmaj julia would arrive presently : meanwhile there was the book . xxmaj he sat down in 
▁ the sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief - case . 
▁ a heavy black volume , amateurishly bound , with no name or title on the 
▁ cover . xxmaj the print also looked slightly irregular . xxmaj the pages were worn at the 
▁ edges , and fell apart , easily , as though the book had passed through many 
▁ hands . xxmaj the inscription on the title - page ran : 
▁ xxup the xxup theory xxup and xxup practice xxup of 
▁ xxup oligarchical xxup collectivism 
▁ by 
▁ xxmaj emmanuel xxmaj goldstein 
▁ xxmaj winston began reading : 
▁ xxmaj chapter i 
▁ xxmaj ignorance is xxmaj strength 
▁ xxmaj throughout recorded time , and probably since the end of the xxmaj neolithic xxmaj age , 
▁ there have been three kinds of people in the world , the xxmaj high , the xxmaj middle , and 
▁ the xxmaj low . xxmaj they have been subdivided in many ways , they have borne countless 
▁ 108 
▁ different names , and their relative numbers , as well as their attitude towards 
▁ one another , have varied from age to age : but the essential structure of society 
▁ has never altered . xxmaj even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable 
▁ changes , the same pattern has always reasserted itself , just as a gyroscope will 
▁ always return to equilibrium , however far it is pushed one way or the other . 
▁ xxmaj the aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable … 
▁ xxmaj winston stopped reading , chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that he 
▁ was reading , in comfort and safety . xxmaj he was alone : no telescreen , no ear at the 
▁ keyhole , no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the page with 
▁ his hand . xxmaj the sweet summer air played against his cheek . xxmaj from somewhere far 
▁ away there floated the faint shouts of children : in the room itself there was no 
▁ sound except the insect voice of the clock . xxmaj he settled deeper into the arm - chair 
▁ and put his feet up on the fender . xxmaj it was bliss , it was etemity . xxmaj suddenly , as one 
▁ sometimes does with a book of which one knows that one will ultimately read 
▁ and re - read every word , he opened it at a different place and found himself at 
▁ xxmaj chapter xxrep 3 i . xxmaj he went on reading : 
▁ xxmaj chapter xxrep 3 i 
▁ xxmaj war is xxmaj peace 
▁ xxmaj the splitting up of the world into three great super - states was an event 
▁ which could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth 
▁ century . xxmaj with the absorption of xxmaj europe by xxmaj russia and of the xxmaj british xxmaj empire by 
▁ the xxmaj united xxmaj states , two of the three existing powers , xxmaj eurasia and xxmaj oceania , were 
▁ already effectively in being . xxmaj the third , xxmaj eastasia , only emerged as a distinct 
▁ unit after another decade of confused fighting . xxmaj the frontiers between the three 
▁ super - states are in some places arbitrary , and in others they fluctuate according 
▁ to the fortunes of war , but in general they follow geographical lines . xxmaj eurasia 
▁ comprises the whole of the northern part of the xxmaj european and xxmaj asiatic landmass , from xxmaj portugal to the xxmaj bering xxmaj strait . xxmaj oceania comprises the xxmaj americas , the 
▁ xxmaj atlantic islands including the xxmaj british xxmaj isles , xxmaj australasia , and the southern portion 
▁ of xxmaj africa . xxmaj eastasia , smaller than the others and with a less definite western 
▁ frontier , comprises xxmaj china and the countries to the south of it , the xxmaj japanese 
▁ islands and a large but fluctuating portion of xxmaj manchuria , xxmaj mongolia , and xxmaj tibet . 
▁ xxmaj in one combination or another , these three super - states are permanently 
▁ at war , and have been so for the past twenty - five years . xxmaj war , however , is 
▁ no longer the desperate , annihilating struggle that it was in the early decades 
▁ of the twentieth centary . xxmaj it is a warfare of limited aims between combatants 
▁ who are unable to destroy one another , have no material cause for fighting and 
▁ are not divided by any genuine ideological difference . xxmaj this is not to say that 
▁ either the conduct of war , or the prevailing attitude towards it , has become less 
▁ bloodthirsty or more chivalrous . xxmaj on the contrary , war hysteria is continuous 
▁ and universal in all countries , and such acts as raping , looting , the slaughter 
▁ of children , the reduction of whole populations to slavery , and reprisals against 
▁ prisoners which extend even to boiling and burying alive , are looked upon as 
▁ normal , and , when they are committed by one ’s own side and not by the enemy , 
▁ meritorious . xxmaj but in a physical sense war involves very small numbers of people , 
▁ mostly highly - trained specialists , and causes comparatively few casualties . xxmaj the 
▁ fighting , when there is any , takes place on the vague frontiers whose whereabouts 
▁ the average man can only guess at , or round the xxmaj floating xxmaj fortresses which 
▁ guard strategic spots on the sea lanes . xxmaj in the centres of civilization war means 
▁ no more than a continuous shortage of consumption goods , and the occasional 
▁ 109 
▁ crash of a rocket bomb which may cause a few scores of deaths . xxmaj war has in fact 
▁ changed its character . xxmaj more exactly , the reasons for which war is waged have 
▁ changed in their order of importance . xxmaj motives which were already present to 
▁ some small extent in the great wars of the early twentieth centuary have now 
▁ become dominant and are consciously recognized and acted upon . 
▁ xxmaj to understand the nature of the present war — for in spite of the regrouping 
▁ which occurs every few years , it is always the same war — one must realize in 
▁ the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive . xxmaj none of the three superstates could be definitively conquered even by the other two in combination . 
▁ xxmaj they are too evenly matched , and their natural defences are too formidable . 
▁ xxmaj eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces . xxmaj oceania by the width of the xxmaj atlantic and the xxmaj pacific , xxmaj eastasia by the fecundity and industriousness of its inhabitants . xxmaj secondly , there is no longer , in a material sense , anything to fight 
▁ about . xxmaj with the establishment of self - contained economies , in which production 
▁ and consumption are geared to one another , the scramble for markets which was 
▁ a main cause of previous wars has come to an end , while the competition for raw 
▁ materials is no longer a matter of life and death . xxmaj in any case each of the three 
▁ super - states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that it needs 
▁ within its own boundaries . xxmaj in so far as the war has a direct economic purpose , 
▁ it is a war for labour power . xxmaj between the frontiers of the super - states , and not 
▁ permanently in the possession of any of them , there lies a rough quadrilateral 
▁ with its corners at xxmaj tangier , xxmaj brazzaville , xxmaj darwin , and xxmaj hong xxmaj kong , containing 
▁ within it about a fifth of the population of the earth . xxmaj it is for the possession 
▁ of these thickly - populated regions , and of the northern ice - cap , that the three 
▁ powers are constantly struggling . xxmaj in practice no one power ever controls the 
▁ whole of the disputed area . xxmaj portions of it are constantly changing hands , and 
▁ it is the chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery 
▁ that dictates the endless changes of alignment . 
▁ xxmaj all of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals , and some of them 
▁ yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in colder climates it 
▁ is necessary to synthesize by comparatively expensive methods . xxmaj but above all 
▁ they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour . xxmaj whichever power controls 
▁ equatorial xxmaj africa , or the countries of the xxmaj middle xxmaj east , or xxmaj southern xxmaj india , or 
▁ the xxmaj indonesian xxmaj archipelago , disposes also of the bodies of scores or hundreds 
▁ of millions of ill - paid and hard - working coolies . xxmaj the inhabitants of these areas , reduced more or less openly to the status of slaves , pass continually from 
▁ conqueror to conqueror , and are expended like so much coal or oil in the race 
▁ to turn out more armaments , to capture more territory , to control more labour 
▁ power , to turn out more armaments , to capture more territory , and so on indefinitely . xxmaj it should be noted that the fighting never really moves beyond the edges 
▁ of the disputed areas . xxmaj the frontiers of xxmaj eurasia flow back and forth between the 
▁ basin of the xxmaj congo and the northern shore of the xxmaj mediterranean ; the islands of 
▁ the xxmaj indian xxmaj ocean and the xxmaj pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured 
▁ by xxmaj oceania or by xxmaj eastasia ; in xxmaj mongolia the dividing line between xxmaj eurasia and 
▁ xxmaj eastasia is never stable ; round the xxmaj pole all three powers lay claim to enormous 
▁ territories which in fact are largely unihabited and unexplored : but the balance of power always remains roughly even , and the territory which forms the 
▁ heartland of each super - state always remains inviolate . xxmaj moreover , the labour of 
▁ the exploited peoples round the xxmaj equator is not really necessary to the world ’s 
▁ economy . xxmaj they add nothing to the wealth of the world , since whatever they 
▁ 110 
▁ produce is used for purposes of war , and the object of waging a war is always 
▁ to be in a better position in which to wage another war . xxmaj by their labour the 
▁ slave populations allow the tempo of continuous warfare to be speeded up . xxmaj but 
▁ if they did not exist , the structure of world society , and the process by which it 
▁ maintains itself , would not be essentially different . 
▁ xxmaj the primary aim of modern warfare ( in accordance with the principles of 
▁ doublethink , this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized by the 
▁ directing brains of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party ) is to use up the products of the machine 
▁ without raising the general standard of living . xxmaj ever since the end of the nineteenth century , the problem of what to do with the surplus of consumption goods 
▁ has been latent in industrial society . xxmaj at present , when few human beings even 
▁ have enough to eat , this problem is obviously not urgent , and it might not have 
▁ become so , even if no artificial processes of destruction had been at work . xxmaj the 
▁ world of today is a bare , hungry , dilapidated place compared with the world that 
▁ existed before 1914 , and still more so if compared with the imaginary future to 
▁ which the people of that period looked forward . xxmaj in the early twentieth century , 
▁ the vision of a future society unbelievably rich , leisured , orderly , and efficient 
▁ — a glittering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow - white concrete — 
▁ was part of the consciousness of nearly every literate person . xxmaj science and technology were developing at a prodigious speed , and it seemed natural to assume 
▁ that they would go on developing . xxmaj this failed to happen , partly because of the 
▁ impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and revolutions , partly because 
▁ scientific and technical progress depended on the empirical habit of thought , 
▁ which could not survive in a strictly regimented society . xxmaj as a whole the world 
▁ is more primitive today than it was fifty years ago . xxmaj certain backward areas 
▁ have advanced , and various devices , always in some way connected with warfare 
▁ and police espionage , have been developed , but experiment and invention have 
▁ largely stopped , and the ravages of the atomic war of the nineteen - fifties have 
▁ never been fully repaired . xxmaj nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are 
▁ still there . xxmaj from the moment when the machine first made its appearance it was 
▁ clear to all thinking people that the need for human drudgery , and therefore to 
▁ a great extent for human inequality , had disappeared . xxmaj if the machine were used 
▁ deliberately for that end , hunger , overwork , dirt , illiteracy , and disease could be 
▁ eliminated within a few generations . xxmaj and in fact , without being used for any 
▁ such purpose , but by a sort of automatic process — by producing wealth which 
▁ it was sometimes impossible not to distribute — the machine did raise the living 
▁ standards of the average humand being very greatly over a period of about fifty 
▁ years at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries . 
▁ xxmaj but it was also clear that an all - round increase in wealth threatened the 
▁ destruction — indeed , in some sense was the destruction — of a hierarchical 
▁ society . xxmaj in a world in which everyone worked short hours , had enough to eat , 
▁ lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator , and possessed a motor - car 
▁ or even an aeroplane , the most obvious and perhaps the most important form 
▁ of inequality would already have disappeared . xxmaj if it once became general , wealth 
▁ would confer no distinction . xxmaj it was possible , no doubt , to imagine a society 
▁ in which wealth , in the sense of personal possessions and luxuries , should be 
▁ evenly distributed , while power remained in the hands of a small privileged 
▁ caste . xxmaj but in practice such a society could not long remain stable . xxmaj for if leisure 
▁ and security were enjoyed by all alike , the great mass of human beings who 
▁ are normally stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to 
 ▁ xxrep 3 1 
▁ think for themselves ; and when once they had done this , they would sooner 
▁ or later realize that the privileged minority had no function , and they would 
▁ sweep it away . xxmaj in the long run , a hierarchical society was only possible on 
▁ a basis of poverty and ignorance . xxmaj to return to the agricultural past , as some 
▁ thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed of doing , was not 
▁ a practicable solution . xxmaj it conflicted with the tendency towards mechanization 
▁ which had become quasi - instinctive throughout almost the whole world , and 
▁ moreover , any country which remained industrially backward was helpless in 
▁ a military sense and was bound to be dominated , directly or indirectly , by its 
▁ more advanced rivals . 
▁ xxmaj nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by restricting 
▁ the output of goods . xxmaj this happened to a great extent during the final phase 
▁ of capitalism , roughly between 1920 and 1940 . xxmaj the economy of many countries 
▁ was allowed to stagnate , land went out of cultivation , capital equipment was 
▁ not added to , great blocks of the population were prevented from working and 
▁ kept half alive by xxmaj state charity . xxmaj but this , too , entailed military weakness , and 
▁ since the privations it inflicted were obviously unnecessary , it made opposition 
▁ inevitable . xxmaj the problem was how to keep the wheels of industry turning without 
▁ increasing the real wealth of the world . xxmaj goods must be produced , but they 
▁ must not be distributed . xxmaj and in practice the only way of achieving this was by 
▁ continuous warfare . 
▁ xxmaj the essential act of war is destruction , not necessarily of human lives , but of 
▁ the products of human labour . xxmaj war is a way of shattering to pieces , or pouring 
▁ into the stratosphere , or sinking in the depths of the sea , materials which might 
▁ otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable , and hence , in the long 
▁ run , too intelligent . xxmaj even when weapons of war are not actually destroyed , 
▁ their manufacture is still a convenient way of expending labour power without 
▁ producing anything that can be consumed . a xxmaj floating xxmaj fortress , for example , 
▁ has locked up in it the labour that would build several hundred cargo - ships . 
▁ xxmaj ultimately it is scrapped as obsolete , never having brought any material benefit 
▁ to anybody , and with further enormous labours another xxmaj floating xxmaj fortress is 
▁ built . xxmaj in principle the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus 
▁ that might exist after meeting the bare needs of the population . xxmaj in practice the 
▁ needs of the population are always underestimated , with the result that there 
▁ is a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life ; but this is looked on as an 
▁ advantage . xxmaj it is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groups somewhere 
▁ near the brink of hardship , because a general state of scarcity increases the 
▁ importance of small privileges and thus magnifies the distinction between one 
▁ group and another . xxmaj by the standards of the early twentieth century , even a 
▁ member of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party lives an austere , laborious kind of life . xxmaj nevertheless , 
▁ the few luxuries that he does enjoy his large , well - appointed flat , the better 
▁ texture of his clothes , the better quality of his food and drink and tobacco , his 
▁ two or three servants , his private motor - car or helicopter — set him in a different 
▁ world from a member of the xxmaj outer xxmaj party , and the members of the xxmaj outer xxmaj party 
▁ have a similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we 
▁ call ’ the proles ’ . xxmaj the social atmosphere is that of a besieged city , where the 
▁ possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth and 
▁ poverty . xxmaj and at the same time the consciousness of being at war , and therefore 
▁ in danger , makes the handing - over of all power to a small caste seem the natural , 
▁ unavoidable condition of survival . 
▁ 112 
▁ xxmaj war , it will be seen , accomplishes the necessary destruction , but accomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way . xxmaj in principle it would be quite 
▁ simple to waste the surplus labour of the world by building temples and pyramids , by digging holes and filling them up again , or even by producing vast 
▁ quantities of goods and then setting fire to them . xxmaj but this would provide only 
▁ the economic and not the emotional basis for a hierarchical society . xxmaj what is 
▁ concerned here is not the morale of masses , whose attitude is unimportant so 
▁ long as they are kept steadily at work , but the morale of the xxmaj party itself . xxmaj even 
▁ the humblest xxmaj party member is expected to be competent , industrious , and even 
▁ intelligent within narrow limits , but it is also necessary that he should be a 
▁ credulous and ignorant fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear , hatred , adulation , and orgiastic triumph . xxmaj in other words it is necessary that he should have 
▁ the mentality appropriate to a state of war . xxmaj it does not matter whether the 
▁ war is actually happening , and , since no decisive victory is possible , it does not 
▁ matter whether the war is going well or badly . xxmaj all that is needed is that a state 
▁ of war should exist . xxmaj the splitting of the intelligence which the xxmaj party requires 
▁ of its members , and which is more easily achieved in an atmosphere of war , is 
▁ now almost universal , but the higher up the ranks one goes , the more marked it 
▁ becomes . xxmaj it is precisely in the xxmaj inner xxmaj party that war hysteria and hatred of the 
▁ enemy are strongest . xxmaj in his capacity as an administrator , it is often necessary 
▁ for a member of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party to know that this or that item of war news is 
▁ untruthful , and he may often be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared 
▁ ones : but such knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of doublethink . 
▁ xxmaj meanwhile no xxmaj inner xxmaj party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief 
▁ that the war is real , and that it is bound to end victoriously , with xxmaj oceania the 
▁ undisputed master of the entire world . 
▁ xxmaj all members of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party believe in this coming conquest as an article 
▁ of faith . xxmaj it is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring more and more territory and so building up an overwhelming preponderance of power , or by the 
▁ discovery of some new and unanswerable weapon . xxmaj the search for new weapons 
▁ continues unceasingly , and is one of the very few remaining activities in which 
▁ the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any outlet . xxmaj in xxmaj oceania at the 
▁ present day , xxmaj science , in the old sense , has almost ceased to exist . xxmaj in xxmaj newspeak 
▁ there is no word for ’ science ’ . xxmaj the empirical method of thought , on which all 
▁ the scientific achievements of the past were founded , is opposed to the most 
▁ fundamental principles of xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj and even technological progress only happens when its products can in some way be used for the diminution of human 
▁ liberty . xxmaj in all the useful arts the world is either standing still or going backwards . xxmaj the fields are cultivated with horse - ploughs while books are written by 
▁ machinery . xxmaj but in matters of vital importance — meaning , in effect , war and 
▁ police espionage — the empirical approach is still encouraged , or at least tolerated . xxmaj the two aims of the xxmaj party are to conquer the whole surface of the earth 
▁ and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent thought . xxmaj there 
▁ are therefore two great problems which the xxmaj party is concerned to solve . xxmaj one is 
▁ how to discover , against his will , what another human being is thinking , and 
▁ the other is how to kill several hundred million people in a few seconds without 
▁ giving warning beforehand . xxmaj in so far as scientific research still continues , this 
▁ is its subject matter . xxmaj the scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist 
▁ and inquisitor , studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial 
▁ 113 
▁ expressions , gestures , and tones of voice , and testing the truth - producing effects of drugs , shock therapy , hypnosis , and physical torture ; or he is chemist , 
▁ physicist , or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special subject 
▁ as are relevant to the taking of life . xxmaj in the vast laboratories of the xxmaj ministry of 
▁ xxmaj peace , and in the experimental stations hidden in the xxmaj brazilian forests , or in the 
▁ xxmaj australian desert , or on lost islands of the xxmaj antarctic , the teams of experts are 
▁ indefatigably at work . xxmaj some are concerned simply with planning the logistics 
▁ of future wars ; others devise larger and larger rocket bombs , more and more 
▁ powerful explosives , and more and more impenetrable armour- plating ; others 
▁ search for new and deadlier gases , or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities as to destroy the vegetation of whole continents , or for 
▁ breeds of disease germs immunized against all possible antibodies ; others strive 
▁ to produce a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine 
▁ under the water , or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing - ship ; 
▁ others explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun ’s rays through 
▁ lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space , or producing artificial 
▁ earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at the earth ’s centre . 
▁ xxmaj but none of these projects ever comes anywhere near realization , and none 
▁ of the three super - states ever gains a significant lead on the others . xxmaj what is 
▁ more remarkable is that all three powers already possess , in the atomic bomb , 
▁ a weapon far more powerful than any that their present researches are likely to 
▁ discover . xxmaj although the xxmaj party , according to its habit , claims the invention for 
▁ itself , atomic bombs first appeared as early as the nineteen - forties , and were 
▁ first used on a large scale about ten years later . xxmaj at that time some hundreds of 
▁ bombs were dropped on industrial centres , chiefly in xxmaj european xxmaj russia , xxmaj western 
▁ xxmaj europe , and xxmaj north xxmaj america . xxmaj the effect was to convince the ruling groups of 
▁ all countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized 
▁ society , and hence of their own power . xxmaj thereafter , although no formal agreement was ever made or hinted at , no more bombs were dropped . xxmaj all three 
▁ powers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up against 
▁ the decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or later . xxmaj and 
▁ meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty or forty 
▁ years . xxmaj helicopters are more used than they were formerly , bombing planes have 
▁ been largely superseded by self - propelled projectiles , and the fragile movable 
▁ battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable xxmaj floating xxmaj fortress ; but otherwise there has been little development . xxmaj the tank , the submarine , the torpedo , 
▁ the machine gun , even the rifle and the hand grenade are still in use . xxmaj and 
▁ in spite of the endless slaughters reported in the xxmaj press and on the telescreens , 
▁ the desperate battles of earlier wars , in which hundreds of thousands or even 
▁ millions of men were often killed in a few weeks , have never been repeated . 
▁ xxmaj none of the three super - states ever attempts any manoeuvre which involves 
▁ the risk of serious defeat . xxmaj when any large operation is undertaken , it is usually 
▁ a surprise attack against an ally . xxmaj the strategy that all three powers are following , or pretend to themselves that they are following , is the same . xxmaj the plan is , 
▁ by a combination of fighting , bargaining , and well - timed strokes of treachery , to 
▁ acquire a ring of bases completely encircling one or other of the rival states , and 
▁ then to sign a pact of friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms 
▁ for so many years as to lull suspicion to sleep . xxmaj during this time rockets loaded 
▁ with atomic bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots ; finally they will 
▁ all be fired simultaneously , with effects so devastating as to make retaliation 
▁ 114 
▁ impossible . xxmaj it will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the remaining world - power , in preparation for another attack . xxmaj this scheme , it is hardly 
▁ necessary to say , is a mere daydream , impossible of realization . xxmaj moreover , no 
▁ fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round the xxmaj equator and the 
▁ xxmaj pole : no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken . xxmaj this explains the fact 
▁ that in some places the frontiers between the superstates are arbitrary . xxmaj eurasia , 
▁ for example , could easily conquer the xxmaj british xxmaj isles , which are geographically 
▁ part of xxmaj europe , or on the other hand it would be possible for xxmaj oceania to push 
▁ its frontiers to the xxmaj rhine or even to the xxmaj vistula . xxmaj but this would violate the 
▁ principle , followed on all sides though never formulated , of cultural integrity . xxmaj if 
▁ xxmaj oceania were to conquer the areas that used once to be known as xxmaj france and 
▁ xxmaj germany , it would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants , a task of 
▁ great physical difficulty , or to assimilate a population of about a hundred million 
▁ people , who , so far as technical development goes , are roughly on the xxmaj oceanic 
▁ level . xxmaj the problem is the same for all three super - states . xxmaj it is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no contact with foreigners , except , 
▁ to a limited extent , with war prisoners and coloured slaves . xxmaj even the official 
▁ ally of the moment is always regarded with the darkest suspicion . xxmaj war prisoners 
▁ apart , the average citizen of xxmaj oceania never sets eyes on a citizen of either xxmaj eurasia or xxmaj eastasia , and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages . xxmaj if he 
▁ were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they are creatures 
▁ similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about them is lies . 
▁ xxmaj the sealed world in which he lives would be broken , and the fear , hatred , and 
▁ self - righteousness on which his morale depends might evaporate . xxmaj it is therefore 
▁ realized on all sides that however often xxmaj persia , or xxmaj egypt , or xxmaj java , or xxmaj ceylon 
▁ may change hands , the main frontiers must never be crossed by anything except 
▁ bombs . 
▁ xxmaj under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud , but tacitly understood and 
▁ acted upon : namely , that the conditions of life in all three super - states are very 
▁ much the same . xxmaj in xxmaj oceania the prevailing philosophy is called xxmaj ingsoc , in xxmaj eurasia 
▁ it is called neo - bolshevism , and in xxmaj eastasia it is called by a xxmaj chinese name usually translated as death - worship , but perhaps better rendered as xxmaj obliteration 
▁ of the xxmaj self . xxmaj the citizen of xxmaj oceania is not allowed to know anything of the tenets 
▁ of the other two philosophies , but he is taught to execrate them as barbarous 
▁ outrages upon morality and common sense . xxmaj actually the three philosophies 
▁ are barely distinguishable , and the social systems which they support are not 
▁ distinguishable at all . xxmaj everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure , the 
▁ same worship of semi - divine leader , the same economy existing by and for continuous warfare . xxmaj it follows that the three super - states not only can not conquer 
▁ one another , but would gain no advantage by doing so . xxmaj on the contrary , so 
▁ long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up , like three sheaves of 
▁ corn . xxmaj and , as usual , the ruling groups of all three powers are simultaneously 
▁ aware and unaware of what they are doing . xxmaj their lives are dedicated to world 
▁ conquest , but they also know that it is necessary that the war should continue 
▁ everlastingly and without victory . xxmaj meanwhile the fact that there is no danger 
▁ of conquest makes possible the denial of reality which is the special feature of 
▁ xxmaj ingsoc and its rival systems of thought . xxmaj here it is necessary to repeat what has 
▁ been said earlier , that by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed 
▁ its character . 
▁ xxmaj in past ages , a war , almost by definition , was something that sooner or later 
▁ 115 
▁ came to an end , usually in unmistakable victory or defeat . xxmaj in the past , also , 
▁ war was one of the main instruments by which human societies were kept in 
▁ touch with physical reality . xxmaj all rulers in all ages have tried to impose a false 
▁ view of the world upon their followers , but they could not afford to encourage 
▁ any illusion that tended to impair military efficiency . xxmaj so long as defeat meant 
▁ the loss of independence , or some other result generally held to be undesirable , 
▁ the precautions against defeat had to be serious . xxmaj physical facts could not be 
▁ ignored . xxmaj in philosophy , or religion , or ethics , or politics , two and two might 
▁ make five , but when one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make 
▁ four . xxmaj inefficient nations were always conquered sooner or later , and the struggle 
▁ for efficiency was inimical to illusions . xxmaj moreover , to be efficient it was necessary 
▁ to be able to learn from the past , which meant having a fairly accurate idea of 
▁ what had happened in the past . xxmaj newspapers and history books were , of course , 
▁ always coloured and biased , but falsification of the kind that is practised today 
▁ would have been impossible . xxmaj war was a sure safeguard of sanity , and so far 
▁ as the ruling classes were concerned it was probably the most important of all 
▁ safeguards . xxmaj while wars could be won or lost , no ruling class could be completely 
▁ irresponsible . 
▁ xxmaj but when war becomes literally continuous , it also ceases to be dangerous . 
▁ xxmaj when war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity . xxmaj technical 
▁ progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or disregarded . xxmaj as 
▁ we have seen , researches that could be called scientific are still carried out for 
▁ the purposes of war , but they are essentially a kind of daydreaming , and their 
▁ failure to show results is not important . xxmaj efficiency , even military efficiency , is 
▁ no longer needed . xxmaj nothing is efficient in xxmaj oceania except the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . 
▁ xxmaj since each of the three super - states is unconquerable , each is in effect a separate 
▁ universe within which almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised . 
▁ xxmaj reality only exerts its pressure through the needs of everyday life — the need 
▁ to eat and drink , to get shelter and clothing , to avoid swallowing poison or 
▁ stepping out of top - storey windows , and the like . xxmaj between life and death , and 
▁ between physical pleasure and physical pain , there is still a distinction , but that 
▁ is all . xxmaj cut off from contact with the outer world , and with the past , the citizen 
▁ of xxmaj oceania is like a man in interstellar space , who has no way of knowing which 
▁ direction is up and which is down . xxmaj the rulers of such a state are absolute , as 
▁ the xxmaj pharaohs or the xxmaj caesars could not be . xxmaj they are obliged to prevent their 
▁ followers from starving to death in numbers large enough to be inconvenient , 
▁ and they are obliged to remain at the same low level of military technique as 
▁ their rivals ; but once that minimum is achieved , they can twist reality into 
▁ whatever shape they choose . 
▁ xxmaj the war , therefore , if we judge it by the standards of previous wars , is 
▁ merely an imposture . xxmaj it is like the battles between certain ruminant animals 
▁ whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable of hurting one 
▁ another . xxmaj but though it is unreal it is not meaningless . xxmaj it eats up the surplus of 
▁ consumable goods , and it helps to preserve the special mental atmosphere that a 
▁ hierarchical society needs . xxmaj war , it will be seen , is now a purely internal affair . xxmaj in 
▁ the past , the ruling groups of all countries , although they might recognize their 
▁ common interest and therefore limit the destructiveness of war , did fight against 
▁ one another , and the victor always plundered the vanquished . xxmaj in our own day 
▁ they are not fighting against one another at all . xxmaj the war is waged by each 
▁ ruling group against its own subjects , and the object of the war is not to make 
▁ 116 
▁ or prevent conquests of territory , but to keep the structure of society intact . 
▁ xxmaj the very word ’ war ’ , therefore , has become misleading . xxmaj it would probably be 
▁ accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to exist . xxmaj the 
▁ peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the xxmaj neolithic xxmaj age 
▁ and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been replaced by something 
▁ quite different . xxmaj the effect would be much the same if the three super - states , 
▁ instead of fighting one another , should agree to live in perpetual peace , each 
▁ inviolate within its own boundaries . xxmaj for in that case each would still be a 
▁ self - contained universe , freed for ever from the sobering influence of external 
▁ danger . a peace that was truly permanent would be the same as a permanent 
▁ war . xxmaj this — although the vast majority of xxmaj party members understand it only 
▁ in a shallower sense — is the inner meaning of the xxmaj party slogan : xxmaj war is xxmaj peace . 
▁ xxmaj winston stopped reading for a moment . xxmaj somewhere in remote distance a 
▁ rocket bomb thundered . xxmaj the blissful feeling of being alone with the forbidden 
▁ book , in a room with no telescreen , had not worn off . xxmaj solitude and safety 
▁ were physical sensations , mixed up somehow with the tiredness of his body , 
▁ the softness of the chair , the touch of the faint breeze from the window that 
▁ played upon his cheek . xxmaj the book fascinated him , or more exactly it reassured 
▁ him . xxmaj in a sense it told him nothing that was new , but that was part of the 
▁ attraction . xxmaj it said what he would have said , if it had been possible for him to 
▁ set his scattered thoughts in order . xxmaj it was the product of a mind similar to 
▁ his own , but enormously more powerful , more systematic , less fear - ridden . xxmaj the 
▁ best books , he perceived , are those that tell you what you know already . xxmaj he 
▁ had just turned back to xxmaj chapter i when he heard xxmaj julia ’s footstep on the stair 
▁ and started out of his chair to meet her . xxmaj she dumped her brown tool - bag on 
▁ the floor and flung herself into his arms . xxmaj it was more than a week since they 
▁ had seen one another . 
▁ ’ i ’ ve got the book , ’ he said as they disentangled themselves . 
▁ ’ oh , you ’ ve got it ? xxmaj good , ’ she said without much interest , and almost 
▁ immediately knelt down beside the oilstove to make the coffee . 
▁ xxmaj they did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half an 
▁ hour . xxmaj the evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up the 
▁ counterpane . xxmaj from below came the familiar sound of singing and the scrape 
▁ of boots on the flagstones . xxmaj the brawny red - armed woman whom xxmaj winston had 
▁ seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard . xxmaj there seemed to be 
▁ no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro between the washtub 
▁ and the line , alternately gagging herself with clothes pegs and breaking forth 
▁ into lusty song . xxmaj julia had settled down on her side and seemed to be already 
▁ on the point of falling asleep . xxmaj he reached out for the book , which was lying on 
▁ the floor , and sat up against the bedhead . 
▁ ’ we must read it , ’ he said . ’ you too . xxmaj all members of the xxmaj brotherhood have 
▁ to read it . ’ 
▁ ’ you read it , ’ she said with her eyes shut . ’ read it aloud . xxmaj that ’s the best 
▁ way . xxmaj then you can explain it to me as you go . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the clock ’s hands said six , meaning eighteen . xxmaj they had three or four hours 
▁ ahead of them . xxmaj he propped the book against his knees and began reading : 
▁ xxmaj chapter i 
▁ xxmaj ignorance is xxmaj strength 
▁ xxmaj throughout recorded time , and probably since the end of the xxmaj neolithic xxmaj age , 
▁ there have been three kinds of people in the world , the xxmaj high , the xxmaj middle , and 
▁ 117 
▁ the xxmaj low . xxmaj they have been subdivided in many ways , they have borne countless 
▁ different names , and their relative numbers , as well as their attitude towards 
▁ one another , have varied from age to age : but the essential structure of society 
▁ has never altered . xxmaj even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable 
▁ changes , the same pattern has always reasserted itself , just as a gyroscope will 
▁ always return to equilibnum , however far it is pushed one way or the other 
▁ ’ julia , are you awake ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ yes , my love , xxmaj i ’ m listening . xxmaj go on . xxmaj it ’s marvellous . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he continued reading : 
▁ xxmaj the aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable . xxmaj the aim of the 
▁ xxmaj high is to remain where they are . xxmaj the aim of the xxmaj middle is to change places 
▁ with the xxmaj high . xxmaj the aim of the xxmaj low , when they have an aim — for it is an 
▁ abiding characteristic of the xxmaj low that they are too much crushed by drudgery 
▁ to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside their daily lives — 
▁ is to abolish all distinctions and create a society in which all men shall be equal . 
▁ xxmaj thus throughout history a struggle which is the same in its main outlines recurs 
▁ over and over again . xxmaj for long periods the xxmaj high seem to be securely in power , 
▁ but sooner or later there always comes a moment when they lose either their 
▁ belief in themselves or their capacity to govern efficiently , or both . xxmaj they are 
▁ then overthrown by the xxmaj middle , who enlist the xxmaj low on their side by pretending 
▁ to them that they are fighting for liberty and justice . xxmaj as soon as they have 
▁ reached their objective , the xxmaj middle thrust the xxmaj low back into their old position 
▁ of servitude , and themselves become the xxmaj high . xxmaj presently a new xxmaj middle group 
▁ splits off from one of the other groups , or from both of them , and the struggle 
▁ begins over again . xxmaj of the three groups , only the xxmaj low are never even temporarily 
▁ successful in achieving their aims . xxmaj it would be an exaggeration to say that 
▁ throughout history there has been no progress of a material kind . xxmaj even today , 
▁ in a period of decline , the average human being is physically better off than he 
▁ was a few centuries ago . xxmaj but no advance in wealth , no softening of manners , 
▁ no reform or revolution has ever brought human equality a millimetre nearer . 
▁ xxmaj from the point of view of the xxmaj low , no historic change has ever meant much 
▁ more than a change in the name of their masters . 
▁ xxmaj by the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pattern had become 
▁ obvious to many observers . xxmaj there then rose schools of thinkers who interpreted 
▁ history as a cyclical process and claimed to show that inequality was the unalterable law of human life . xxmaj this doctrine , of course , had always had its adherents , 
▁ but in the manner in which it was now put forward there was a significant 
▁ change . xxmaj in the past the need for a hierarchical form of society had been the 
▁ doctrine specifically of the xxmaj high . xxmaj it had been preached by kings and aristocrats 
▁ and by the priests , lawyers , and the like who were parasitical upon them , and it 
▁ had generally been softened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world 
▁ beyond the grave . xxmaj the xxmaj middle , so long as it was struggling for power , had always made use of such terms as freedom , justice , and fraternity . xxmaj now , however , 
▁ the concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not 
▁ yet in positions of command , but merely hoped to be so before long . xxmaj in the 
▁ past the xxmaj middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality , and then 
▁ had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrown . xxmaj the 
▁ new xxmaj middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehand . xxmaj socialism , 
▁ a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link 
▁ in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity , was 
▁ 118 
▁ still deeply infected by the xxmaj utopianism of past ages . xxmaj but in each variant of xxmaj socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of establishing liberty 
▁ and equality was more and more openly abandoned . xxmaj the new movements which 
▁ appeared in the middle years of the century , xxmaj ingsoc in xxmaj oceania , neo - bolshevism 
▁ in xxmaj eurasia , death - worship , as it is commonly called , in xxmaj eastasia , had the conscious aim of perpetuating unfreedom and inequality . xxmaj these new movements , 
▁ of course , grew out of the old ones and tended to keep their names and pay lipservice to their ideology . xxmaj but the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress 
▁ and freeze history at a chosen moment . xxmaj the familiar pendulum swing was to 
▁ happen once more , and then stop . xxmaj as usual , the xxmaj high were to be turned out 
▁ by the xxmaj middle , who would then become the xxmaj high ; but this time , by conscious 
▁ strategy , the xxmaj high would be able to maintain their position permanently . 
▁ xxmaj the new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historical 
▁ knowledge , and the growth of the historical sense , which had hardly existed 
▁ before the nineteenth century . xxmaj the cyclical movement of history was now intelligible , or appeared to be so ; and if it was intelligible , then it was alterable . 
▁ xxmaj but the principal , underlying cause was that , as early as the beginning of the 
▁ twentieth century , human equality had become technically possible . xxmaj it was still 
▁ true that men were not equal in their native talents and that functions had 
▁ to be specialized in ways that favoured some individuals against others ; but 
▁ there was no longer any real need for class distinctions or for large differences 
▁ of wealth . xxmaj in earlier ages , class distinctions had been not only inevitable but 
▁ desirable . xxmaj inequality was the price of civilization . xxmaj with the development of machine production , however , the case was altered . xxmaj even if it was still necessary 
▁ for human beings to do different kinds of work , it was no longer necessary for 
▁ them to live at different social or economic levels . xxmaj therefore , from the point of 
▁ view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power , human equality 
▁ was no longer an ideal to be striven after , but a danger to be averted . xxmaj in more 
▁ primitive ages , when a just and peaceful society was in fact not possible , it had 
▁ been fairly easy to believe it . xxmaj the idea of an earthly paradise in which men 
▁ should live together in a state of brotherhood , without laws and without brute 
▁ labour , had haunted the human imagination for thousands of years . xxmaj and this 
▁ vision had had a certain hold even on the groups who actually profited by each 
▁ historical change . xxmaj the heirs of the xxmaj french , xxmaj english , and xxmaj american revolutions 
▁ had partly believed in their own phrases about the rights of man , freedom of 
▁ speech , equality before the law , and the like , and have even allowed their conduct to be influenced by them to some extent . xxmaj but by the fourth decade of 
▁ the twentieth century all the main currents of political thought were authoritarian . xxmaj the earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the moment when 
▁ it became realizable . xxmaj every new political theory , by whatever name it called 
▁ itself , led back to hierarchy and regimentation . xxmaj and in the general hardening 
▁ of outlook that set in round about 1930 , practices which had been long abandoned , in some cases for hundreds of years — imprisonment without trial , the 
▁ use of war prisoners as slaves , public executions , torture to extract confessions , 
▁ the use of hostages , and the deportation of whole populations - not only became 
▁ common again , but were tolerated and even defended by people who considered 
▁ themselves enlightened and progressive . 
▁ xxmaj it was only after a decade of national wars , civil wars , revolutions , and 
▁ counter - revolutions in all parts of the world that xxmaj ingsoc and its rivals emerged 
▁ as fully worked - out political theories . xxmaj but they had been foreshadowed by the 
▁ 119 
▁ various systems , generally called totalitarian , which had appeared earlier in 
▁ the century , and the main outlines of the world which would emerge from the 
▁ prevailing chaos had long been obvious . xxmaj what kind of people would control this 
▁ world had been equally obvious . xxmaj the new aristocracy was made up for the most 
▁ part of bureaucrats , scientists , technicians , trade - union organizers , publicity 
▁ experts , sociologists , teachers , journalists , and professional politicians . xxmaj these 
▁ people , whose origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of 
▁ the working class , had been shaped and brought together by the barren world 
▁ of monopoly industry and centralized government . xxmaj as compared with their 
▁ opposite numbers in past ages , they were less avaricious , less tempted by luxury , 
▁ hungrier for pure power , and , above all , more conscious of what they were doing 
▁ and more intent on crushing opposition . xxmaj this last difference was cardinal . xxmaj by 
▁ comparison with that existing today , all the tyrannies of the past were halfhearted and inefficient . xxmaj the ruling groups were always infected to some extent 
▁ by liberal ideas , and were content to leave loose ends everywhere , to regard only 
▁ the overt act and to be uninterested in what their subjects were thinking . xxmaj even 
▁ the xxmaj catholic xxmaj church of the xxmaj middle xxmaj ages was tolerant by modern standards . xxmaj part 
▁ of the reason for this was that in the past no government had the power to keep 
▁ its citizens under constant surveillance . xxmaj the invention of print , however , made 
▁ it easier to manipulate public opinion , and the film and the radio carried the 
▁ process further . xxmaj with the development of television , and the technical advance 
▁ which made it possible to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same 
▁ instrument , private life came to an end . xxmaj every citizen , or at least every citizen 
▁ important enough to be worth watching , could be kept for twentyfour hours a 
▁ day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propaganda , with all 
▁ other channels of communication closed . xxmaj the possibility of enforcing not only 
▁ complete obedience to the will of the xxmaj state , but complete uniformity of opinion 
▁ on all subjects , now existed for the first time . 
▁ xxmaj after the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties , society regrouped 
▁ itself , as always , into xxmaj high , xxmaj middle , and xxmaj low . xxmaj but the new xxmaj high group , unlike all 
▁ its forerunners , did not act upon instinct but knew what was needed to safeguard 
▁ its position . xxmaj it had long been realized that the only secure basis for oligarchy 
▁ is collectivism . xxmaj wealth and privilege are most easily defended when they are 
▁ possessed jointly . xxmaj the so - called ’ abolition of private property ’ which took place 
▁ in the middle years of the century meant , in effect , the concentration of property 
▁ in far fewer hands than before : but with this difference , that the new owners 
▁ were a group instead of a mass of individuals . xxmaj individually , no member of the 
▁ xxmaj party owns anything , except petty personal belongings . xxmaj collectively , the xxmaj party 
▁ owns everything in xxmaj oceania , because it controls everything , and disposes of the 
▁ products as it thinks fit . xxmaj in the years following the xxmaj revolution it was able to step 
▁ into this commanding position almost unopposed , because the whole process was 
▁ represented as an act of collectivization . xxmaj it had always been assumed that if the 
▁ capitalist class were expropriated , xxmaj socialism must follow : and unquestionably 
▁ the capitalists had been expropriated . xxmaj factories , mines , land , houses , transport 
▁ — everything had been taken away from them : and since these things were no 
▁ longer private property , it followed that they must be public property . xxmaj ingsoc , 
▁ which grew out of the earlier xxmaj socialist movement and inherited its phraseology , 
▁ has in fact carried out the main item in the xxmaj socialist programme ; with the 
▁ result , foreseen and intended beforehand , that economic inequality has been 
▁ made permanent . 
▁ 120 
▁ xxmaj but the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper than this . 
▁ xxmaj there are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power . xxmaj either 
▁ it is conquered from without , or it governs so inefficiently that the masses are 
▁ stirred to revolt , or it allows a strong and discontented xxmaj middle group to come 
▁ into being , or it loses its own self - confidence and willingness to govern . xxmaj these 
▁ causes do not operate singly , and as a rule all four of them are present in some 
▁ degree . a ruling class which could guard against all of them would remain in 
▁ power permanently . xxmaj ultimately the determining factor is the mental attitude of 
▁ the ruling class itself . 
▁ xxmaj after the middle of the present century , the first danger had in reality disappeared . xxmaj each of the three powers which now divide the world is in fact 
▁ unconquerable , and could only become conquerable through slow demographic 
▁ changes which a government with wide powers can easily avert . xxmaj the second 
▁ danger , also , is only a theoretical one . xxmaj the masses never revolt of their own 
▁ accord , and they never revolt merely because they are oppressed . xxmaj indeed , so 
▁ long as they are not permitted to have standards of comparison , they never 
▁ even become aware that they are oppressed . xxmaj the recurrent economic crises of 
▁ past times were totally unnecessary and are not now permitted to happen , but 
▁ other and equally large dislocations can and do happen without having political 
▁ results , because there is no way in which discontent can become articulate . xxmaj as 
▁ fcr the problem of overproduction , which has been latent in our society since 
▁ the development of machine technique , it is solved by the device of continuous 
▁ warfare ( see xxmaj chapter xxrep 3 i ) , which is also useful in keying up public morale to the 
▁ necessary pitch . xxmaj from the point of view of our present rulers , therefore , the only 
▁ genuine dangers are the splitting - off of a new group of able , under - employed , 
▁ power - hungry people , and the growth of liberalism and scepticism in their own 
▁ ranks . xxmaj the problem , that is to say , is educational . xxmaj it is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the directing group and of the larger 
▁ executive group that lies immediately below it . xxmaj the consciousness of the masses 
▁ needs only to be influenced in a negative way . 
▁ xxmaj given this background , one could infer , if one did not know it already , 
▁ the general structure of xxmaj oceanic society . xxmaj at the apex of the pyramid comes 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj big xxmaj brother is infallible and all - powerful . xxmaj every success , every 
▁ achievement , every victory , every scientific discovery , all knowledge , all wisdom , 
▁ all happiness , all virtue , are held to issue directly from his leadership and inspiration . xxmaj nobody has ever seen xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj he is a face on the hoardings , a 
▁ voice on the telescreen . xxmaj we may be reasonably sure that he will never die , and 
▁ there is already considerable uncertainty as to when he was born . xxmaj big xxmaj brother is 
▁ the guise in which the xxmaj party chooses to exhibit itself to the world . xxmaj his function 
▁ is to act as a focusing point for love , fear , and reverence , emotions which are 
▁ more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organization . xxmaj below xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother comes the xxmaj inner xxmaj party . its numbers limited to six millions , or something 
▁ less than 2 per cent of the population of xxmaj oceania . xxmaj below the xxmaj inner xxmaj party comes 
▁ the xxmaj outer xxmaj party , which , if the xxmaj inner xxmaj party is described as the brain of the xxmaj state , 
▁ may be justly likened to the hands . xxmaj below that come the dumb masses whom 
▁ we habitually refer to as ’ the proles ’ , numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the 
▁ population . xxmaj in the terms of our earlier classification , the proles are the xxmaj low : for 
▁ the slave population of the equatorial lands who pass constantly from conqueror 
▁ to conqueror , are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure . 
▁ xxmaj in principle , membership of these three groups is not hereditary . xxmaj the child 
▁ 121 
▁ of xxmaj inner xxmaj party parents is in theory not born into the xxmaj inner xxmaj party . xxmaj admission to 
▁ either branch of the xxmaj party is by examination , taken at the age of sixteen . xxmaj nor 
▁ is there any racial discrimination , or any marked domination of one province 
▁ by another . xxmaj jews , xxmaj negroes , xxmaj south xxmaj americans of pure xxmaj indian blood are to be 
▁ found in the highest ranks of the xxmaj party , and the administrators of any area 
▁ are always drawn from the inhabitants of that area . xxmaj in no part of xxmaj oceania 
▁ do the inhabitants have the feeling that they are a colonial population ruled 
▁ from a distant capital . xxmaj oceania has no capital , and its titular head is a person 
▁ whose whereabouts nobody knows . xxmaj except that xxmaj english is its chief lingua franca 
▁ and xxmaj newspeak its official language , it is not centralized in any way . xxmaj its rulers 
▁ are not held together by blood - ties but by adherence to a common doctrine . 
▁ xxmaj it is true that our society is stratified , and very rigidly stratified , on what at 
▁ first sight appear to be hereditary lines . xxmaj there is far less to- and - fro movement 
▁ between the different groups than happened under capitalism or even in the preindustrial age . xxmaj between the two branches of the xxmaj party there is a certain amount 
▁ of interchange , but only so much as will ensure that weaklings are excluded 
▁ from the xxmaj inner xxmaj party and that ambitious members of the xxmaj outer xxmaj party are made 
▁ harmless by allowing them to rise . xxmaj proletarians , in practice , are not allowed 
▁ to graduate into the xxmaj party . xxmaj the most gifted among them , who might possibly 
▁ become nuclei of discontent , are simply marked down by the xxmaj thought xxmaj police 
▁ and eliminated . xxmaj but this state of affairs is not necessarily permanent , nor is it 
▁ a matter of principle . xxmaj the xxmaj party is not a class in the old sense of the word . xxmaj it 
▁ does not aim at transmitting power to its own children , as such ; and if there 
▁ were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top , it would be perfectly 
▁ prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of the proletariat . 
▁ xxmaj in the crucial years , the fact that the xxmaj party was not a hereditary body did a 
▁ great deal to neutralize opposition . xxmaj the older kind of xxmaj socialist , who had been 
▁ trained to fight against something called ’ class privilege ’ assumed that what 
▁ is not hereditary can not be permanent . xxmaj he did not see that the continuity of 
▁ an oligarchy need not be physical , nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary 
▁ aristocracies have always been shortlived , whereas adoptive organizations such 
▁ as the xxmaj catholic xxmaj church have sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of 
▁ years . xxmaj the essence of oligarchical rule is not father - to - son inheritance , but the 
▁ persistence of a certain world - view and a certain way of life , imposed by the dead 
▁ upon the living . a ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate 
▁ its successors . xxmaj the xxmaj party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but 
▁ with perpetuating itself . xxmaj who wields power is not important , provided that the 
▁ hierarchical structure remains always the same . 
▁ xxmaj all the beliefs , habits , tastes , emotions , mental attitudes that characterize 
▁ our time are really designed to sustain the mystique of the xxmaj party and prevent 
▁ the true nature of present - day society from being perceived . xxmaj physical rebellion , 
▁ or any preliminary move towards rebellion , is at present not possible . xxmaj from the 
▁ proletarians nothing is to be feared . xxmaj left to themselves , they will continue from 
▁ generation to generation and from century to century , working , breeding , and 
▁ dying , not only without any impulse to rebel , but without the power of grasping 
▁ that the world could be other than it is . xxmaj they could only become dangerous 
▁ if the advance of industrial technique made it necessary to educate them more 
▁ highly ; but , since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important , the 
▁ level of popular education is actually declining . xxmaj what opinions the masses hold , 
▁ or do not hold , is looked on as a matter of indifference . xxmaj they can be granted 
▁ 122 
▁ intellectual liberty because they have no intellect . xxmaj in a xxmaj party member , on the 
▁ other hand , not even the smallest deviation of opinion on the most unimportant 
▁ subject can be tolerated . 
▁ a xxmaj party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the xxmaj thought 
▁ xxmaj police . xxmaj even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone . xxmaj wherever he may be , asleep or awake , working or resting , in his bath or in bed , he 
▁ can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he is being inspected . xxmaj nothing that he does is indifferent . xxmaj his friendships , his relaxations , 
▁ his behaviour towards his wife and children , the expression of his face when 
▁ he is alone , the words he mutters in sleep , even the characteristic movements 
▁ of his body , are all jealously scrutinized . xxmaj not only any actual misdemeanour , 
▁ but any eccentricity , however small , any change of habits , any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom of an inner struggle , is certain to 
▁ be detected . xxmaj he has no freedom of choice in any direction whatever . xxmaj on the 
▁ other hand his actions are not regulated by law or by any clearly formulated 
▁ code of behaviour . xxmaj in xxmaj oceania there is no law . xxmaj thoughts and actions which , 
▁ when detected , mean certain death are not formally forbidden , and the endless 
▁ purges , arrests , tortures , imprisonments , and vaporizations are not inflicted as 
▁ punishment for crimes which have actually been committed , but are merely the 
▁ wiping - out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the 
▁ future . a xxmaj party member is required to have not only the right opinions , but the 
▁ right instincts . xxmaj many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him are never 
▁ plainly stated , and could not be stated without laying bare the contradictions 
▁ inherent in xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj if he is a person naturally orthodox ( in xxmaj newspeak a goodthinker ) , he will in all circumstances know , without taking thought , what is 
▁ the true belief or the desirable emotion . xxmaj but in any case an elaborate mental 
▁ training , undergone in childhood and grouping itself round the xxmaj newspeak words 
▁ crimestop , blackwhite , and doublethink , makes him unwilling and unable to 
▁ think too deeply on any subject whatever . 
▁ a xxmaj party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respites from 
▁ enthusiasm . xxmaj he is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred of foreign 
▁ enemies and internal traitors , triumph over victories , and self - abasement before 
▁ the power and wisdom of the xxmaj party . xxmaj the discontents produced by his bare , 
▁ unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards and dissipated by such devices 
▁ as the xxmaj two xxmaj minutes xxmaj hate , and the speculations which might possibly induce a 
▁ sceptical or rebellious attitude are killed in advance by his early acquired inner 
▁ discipline . xxmaj the first and simplest stage in the discipline , which can be taught 
▁ even to young children , is called , in xxmaj newspeak , crimestop . xxmaj crimestop means 
▁ the faculty of stopping short , as though by instinct , at the threshold of any 
▁ dangerous thought . xxmaj it includes the power of not grasping analogies , of failing 
▁ to perceive logical errors , of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if they 
▁ are inimical to xxmaj ingsoc , and of being bored or repelled by any train of thought 
▁ which is capable of leading in a heretical direction . xxmaj crimestop , in short , means 
▁ protective stupidity . xxmaj but stupidity is not enough . xxmaj on the contrary , orthodoxy 
▁ in the full sense demands a control over one ’s own mental processes as complete 
▁ as that of a contortionist over his body . xxmaj oceanic society rests ultimately on the 
▁ belief that xxmaj big xxmaj brother is omnipotent and that the xxmaj party is infallible . xxmaj but since 
▁ in reality xxmaj big xxmaj brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible , there is 
▁ need for an unwearying , moment - to - moment flexibility in the treatment of facts . 
▁ xxmaj the keyword here is blackwhite . xxmaj like so many xxmaj newspeak words , this word has 
▁ 123 
▁ two mutually contradictory meanings . xxmaj applied to an opponent , it means the 
▁ habit of impudently claiming that black is white , in contradiction of the plain 
▁ facts . xxmaj applied to a xxmaj party member , it means a loyal willingness to say that black 
▁ is white when xxmaj party discipline demands this . xxmaj but it means also the ability to 
▁ believe that black is white , and more , to know that black is white , and to forget 
▁ that one has ever believed the contrary . xxmaj this demands a continuous alteration 
▁ of the past , made possible by the system of thought which really embraces all 
▁ the rest , and which is known in xxmaj newspeak as doublethink . 
▁ xxmaj the alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons , one of which is subsidiary and , so to speak , precautionary . xxmaj the subsidiary reason is that the xxmaj party 
▁ member , like the proletarian , tolerates present - day conditions partly because 
▁ he has no standards of comparison . xxmaj he must be cut off from the past , just as 
▁ he must be cut off from foreign countries , because it is necessary for him to 
▁ believe that he is better off than his ancestors and that the average level of 
▁ material comfort is constantly rising . xxmaj but by far the more important reason 
▁ for the readjustment of the past is the need to safeguard the infallibility of the 
▁ xxmaj party . xxmaj it is not merely that speeches , statistics , and records of every kind must 
▁ be constantly brought up to date in order to show that the predictions of the 
▁ xxmaj party were in all cases right . xxmaj it is also that no change in doctrine or in political 
▁ alignment can ever be admitted . xxmaj for to change one ’s mind , or even one ’s policy , 
▁ is a confession of weakness . xxmaj if , for example , xxmaj eurasia or xxmaj eastasia ( whichever it 
▁ may be ) is the enemy today , then that country must always have been the enemy . xxmaj and if the facts say otherwise then the facts must be altered . xxmaj thus history 
▁ is continuously rewritten . xxmaj this day - to - day falsification of the past , carried out 
▁ by the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth , is as necessary to the stability of the regime as the 
▁ work of repression and espionage carried out by the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love . 
▁ xxmaj the mutability of the past is the central tenet of xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj past events , it is 
▁ argued , have no objective existence , but survive only in written records and in 
▁ human memories . xxmaj the past is whatever the records and the memories agree 
▁ upon . xxmaj and since the xxmaj party is in full control of all records and in equally full 
▁ control of the minds of its members , it follows that the past is whatever the xxmaj party 
▁ chooses to make it . xxmaj it also follows that though the past is alterable , it never has 
▁ been altered in any specific instance . xxmaj for when it has been recreated in whatever 
▁ shape is needed at the moment , then this new version is the past , and no different 
▁ past can ever have existed . xxmaj this holds good even when , as often happens , the 
▁ same event has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course of a 
▁ year . xxmaj at all times the xxmaj party is in possession of absolute truth , and clearly the 
▁ absolute can never have been different from what it is now . xxmaj it will be seen that 
▁ the control of the past depends above all on the training of memory . xxmaj to make 
▁ sure that all written records agree with the orthodoxy of the moment is merely 
▁ a mechanical act . xxmaj but it is also necessary to remember that events happened 
▁ in the desired manner . xxmaj and if it is necessary to rearrange one ’s memories or to 
▁ tamper with written records , then it is necessary to forget that one has done 
▁ so . xxmaj the trick of doing this can be learned like any other mental technique . 
▁ xxmaj it is learned by the majority of xxmaj party members , and certainly by all who are 
▁ intelligent as well as orthodox . xxmaj in xxmaj oldspeak it is called , quite frankly , ’ reality 
▁ control ’ . xxmaj in xxmaj newspeak it is called doublethink , though doublethink comprises 
▁ much else as well . 
▁ xxmaj doublethink means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one ’s 
▁ mind simultaneously , and accepting both of them . xxmaj the xxmaj party intellectual knows 
▁ 124 
▁ in which direction his memories must be altered ; he therefore knows that he is 
▁ playing tricks with reality ; but by the exercise of doublethink he also satisfies 
▁ himself that reality is not violated . xxmaj the process has to be conscious , or it would 
▁ not be carried out with sufficient precision , but it also has to be unconscious , 
▁ or it would bring with it a feeling of falsity and hence of guilt . xxmaj doublethink 
▁ lies at the very heart of xxmaj ingsoc , since the essential act of the xxmaj party is to use 
▁ conscious deception while retaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty . xxmaj to tell deliberate lies while genuinely believing in them , to forget 
▁ any fact that has become inconvenient , and then , when it becomes necessary 
▁ again , to draw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed , to deny 
▁ the existence of objective reality and all the while to take account of the reality 
▁ which one denies — all this is indispensably necessary . xxmaj even in using the word 
▁ doublethink it is necessary to exercise doublethink . xxmaj for by using the word one 
▁ admits that one is tampering with reality ; by a fresh act of doublethink one 
▁ erases this knowledge ; and so on indefinitely , with the lie always one leap ahead 
▁ of the truth . xxmaj ultimately it is by means of doublethink that the xxmaj party has been 
▁ able — and may , for all we know , continue to be able for thousands of years — 
▁ to arrest the course of history . 
▁ xxmaj all past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified or because they grew soft . xxmaj either they became stupid and arrogant , failed to adjust 
▁ themselves to changing circumstances , and were overthrown ; or they became 
▁ liberal and cowardly , made concessions when they should have used force , and 
▁ once again were overthrown . xxmaj they fell , that is to say , either through consciousness or through unconsciousness . xxmaj it is the achievement of the xxmaj party to have 
▁ produced a system of thought in which both conditions can exist simultaneously . xxmaj and upon no other intellectual basis could the dominion of the xxmaj party be 
▁ made permanent . xxmaj if one is to rule , and to continue ruling , one must be able to 
▁ dislocate the sense of reality . xxmaj for the secret of rulership is to combine a belief 
▁ in one ’s own infallibility with the xxmaj power to learn from past mistakes . 
▁ xxmaj it need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of doublethink are those 
▁ who invented doublethink and know that it is a vast system of mental cheating . 
▁ xxmaj in our society , those who have the best knowledge of what is happening are also 
▁ those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is . xxmaj in general , the greater the 
▁ understanding , the greater the delusion ; the more intelligent , the less sane . xxmaj one 
▁ clear illustration of this is the fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one 
▁ rises in the social scale . xxmaj those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly 
▁ rational are the subject peoples of the disputed territories . xxmaj to these people the 
▁ war is simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodies 
▁ like a tidal wave . xxmaj which side is winning is a matter of complete indifference to 
▁ them . xxmaj they are aware that a change of overlordship means simply that they will 
▁ be doing the same work as before for new masters who treat them in the same 
▁ manner as the old ones . xxmaj the slightly more favoured workers whom we call ’ the 
▁ proles ’ are only intermittently conscious of the war . xxmaj when it is necessary they 
▁ can be prodded into frenzies of fear and hatred , but when left to themselves they 
▁ are capable of forgetting for long periods that the war is happening . xxmaj it is in the 
▁ ranks of the xxmaj party , and above all of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , that the true war enthusiasm 
▁ is found . xxmaj world - conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to 
▁ be impossible . xxmaj this peculiar linking - together of opposites — knowledge with 
▁ ignorance , cynicism with fanaticism - is one of the chief distinguishing marks of 
▁ xxmaj oceanic society . xxmaj the official ideology abounds with contradictions even when 
▁ 125 
▁ there is no practical reason for them . xxmaj thus , the xxmaj party rejects and vilifies every 
▁ principle for which the xxmaj socialist movement originally stood , and it chooses to 
▁ do this in the name of xxmaj socialism . xxmaj it preaches a contempt for the working class 
▁ unexampled for centuries past , and it dresses its members in a uniform which 
▁ was at one time peculiar to manual workers and was adopted for that reason . xxmaj it 
▁ systematically undermines the solidarity of the family , and it calls its leader by a 
▁ name which is a direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty . xxmaj even the names 
▁ of the four xxmaj ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in 
▁ their deliberate reversal of the facts . xxmaj the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj peace concerns itself with 
▁ war , the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth with lies , the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love with torture and the 
▁ xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty with starvation . xxmaj these contradictions are not accidental , 
▁ nor do they result from ordinary hypocrisy ; they are deliberate exercises in 
▁ doublethink . xxmaj for it is only by reconciling contradictions that power can be 
▁ retained indefinitely . xxmaj in no other way could the ancient cycle be broken . xxmaj if 
▁ human equality is to be for ever averted — if the xxmaj high , as we have called them , 
▁ are to keep their places permanently — then the prevailing mental condition 
▁ must be controlled insanity . 
▁ xxmaj but there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored . 
▁ xxmaj it is ; why should human equality be averted ? xxmaj supposing that the mechanics 
▁ of the process have been rightly described , what is the motive for this huge , 
▁ accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular moment of time ? 
▁ xxmaj here we reach the central secret . xxmaj as we have seen . the mystique of the 
▁ xxmaj party , and above all of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party , depends upon doublethink . xxmaj but deeper 
▁ than this lies the original motive , the never - questioned instinct that first led to 
▁ the seizure of power and brought doublethink , the xxmaj thought xxmaj police , continuous 
▁ warfare , and all the other necessary paraphernalia into existence afterwards . 
▁ xxmaj this motive really consists … xxmaj winston became aware of silence , as one becomes 
▁ aware of a new sound . xxmaj it seemed to him that xxmaj julia had been very still for some 
▁ time past . xxmaj she was lying on her side , naked from the waist upwards , with her 
▁ cheek pillowed on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes . xxmaj her 
▁ breast rose and fell slowly and regularly . 
▁ ’ julia . 
▁ xxmaj no answer . 
▁ ’ julia , are you awake ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj no answer . xxmaj she was asleep . xxmaj he shut the book , put it carefully on the floor , 
▁ lay down , and pulled the coverlet over both of them . 
▁ xxmaj he had still , he reflected , not learned the ultimate secret . xxmaj he understood 
▁ how ; he did not understand why . xxmaj chapter xxup i , like xxmaj chapter xxrep 3 i , had not actually told him anything that he did not know , it had merely systematized the 
▁ knowledge that he possessed already . xxmaj but after reading it he knew better than 
▁ before that he was not mad . xxmaj being in a minority , even a minority of one , did 
▁ not make you mad . xxmaj there was truth and there was untruth , and if you clung 
▁ to the truth even against the whole world , you were not mad . a yellow beam 
▁ from the sinking sun slanted in through the window and fell across the pillow . 
▁ xxmaj he shut his eyes . xxmaj the sun on his face and the girl ’s smooth body touching his 
▁ own gave him a strong , sleepy , confident feeling . xxmaj he was safe , everything was 
▁ all right . xxmaj he fell asleep murmuring ’ sanity is not statistical , ’ with the feeling 
▁ that this remark contained in it a profound wisdom . xxmaj when he woke it was with 
▁ the sensation of having slept for a long time , but a glance at the old - fashioned 
▁ clock told him that it was only twenty - thirty . xxmaj he lay dozing for a while ; then 
▁ 126 
▁ the usual deep - lunged singing struck up from the yard below ; 
▁ ’ it was only an ’ opeless fancy , 
▁ xxmaj it passed like an xxmaj ipril dye , 
▁ xxmaj but a look an ’ a word an ’ the dreams they stirred 
▁ xxmaj they ’ ave stolen my ’ eart awye ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj the driveling song seemed to have kept its popularity . xxmaj you still heard it 
▁ all over the place . xxmaj it had outlived the xxmaj hate xxmaj song . xxmaj julia woke at the sound , 
▁ stretched herself luxuriously , and got out of bed . 
▁ ’ i ’ m hungry , ’ she said . ’ let ’s make some more coffee . xxmaj damn ! xxmaj the stove ’s 
▁ gone out and the water ’s cold . ’ xxmaj she picked the stove up and shook it . ’ there ’s 
▁ no oil in it . ’ 
▁ ’ we can get some from old xxmaj charrington , i expect . ’ 
▁ ’ the funny thing is i made sure it was full . xxmaj i ’ m going to put my clothes on , ’ 
▁ she added . ’ it seems to have got colder . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston also got up and dressed himself . xxmaj the indefatigable voice sang on : 
▁ ’ they sye that time ’ eals all things , 
▁ xxmaj they sye you can always forget ; 
▁ xxmaj but the smiles an ’ the tears acrorss the years 
▁ xxmaj they twist my ’ eart - strings yet ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj as he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window . xxmaj the 
▁ sun must have gone down behind the houses ; it was not shining into the yard any 
▁ longer . xxmaj the flagstones were wet as though they had just been washed , and he 
▁ had the feeling that the sky had been washed too , so fresh and pale was the blue 
▁ between the chimney - pots . xxmaj tirelessly the woman marched to and fro , corking 
▁ and uncorking herself , singing and falling silent , and pegging out more diapers , 
▁ and more and yet more . xxmaj he wondered whether she took in washing for a living or 
▁ was merely the slave of twenty or thirty grandchildren . xxmaj julia had come across to 
▁ his side ; together they gazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure 
▁ below . xxmaj as he looked at the woman in her characteristic attitude , her thick arms 
▁ reaching up for the line , her powerful mare - like buttocks protruded , it struck 
▁ him for the first time that she was beautiful . xxmaj it had never before occurred to 
▁ him that the body of a woman of fifty , blown up to monstrous dimensions by 
▁ childbearing , then hardened , roughened by work till it was coarse in the grain 
▁ like an over - ripe turnip , could be beautiful . xxmaj but it was so , and after all , he 
▁ thought , why not ? xxmaj the solid , contourless body , like a block of granite , and the 
▁ rasping red skin , bore the same relation to the body of a girl as the rose - hip to 
▁ the rose . xxmaj why should the fruit be held inferior to the flower ? 
▁ ’ she ’s beautiful , ’ he murmured . 
▁ ’ she ’s a metre across the hips , easily , ’ said xxmaj julia . 
▁ ’ that is her style of beauty , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ xxmaj he held xxmaj julia ’s supple waist easily encircled by his arm . xxmaj from the hip to 
▁ the knee her flank was against his . xxmaj out of their bodies no child would ever 
▁ come . xxmaj that was the one thing they could never do . xxmaj only by word of mouth , 
▁ from mind to mind , could they pass on the secret . xxmaj the woman down there 
▁ had no mind , she had only strong arms , a warm heart , and a fertile belly . xxmaj he 
▁ wondered how many children she had given birth to . xxmaj it might easily be fifteen . 
▁ xxmaj she had had her momentary flowering , a year , perhaps , of wild - rose beauty and 
▁ then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized fruit and grown hard and red 
▁ and coarse , and then her life had been laundering , scrubbing , darning , cooking , 
▁ sweeping , polishing , mending , scrubbing , laundering , first for children , then for 
▁ 127 
▁ grandchildren , over thirty unbroken years . xxmaj at the end of it she was still singing . 
▁ xxmaj the mystical reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the 
▁ aspect of the pale , cloudless sky , stretching away behind the chimney - pots into 
▁ interminable distance . xxmaj it was curious to think that the sky was the same for 
▁ everybody , in xxmaj eurasia or xxmaj eastasia as well as here . xxmaj and the people under the sky 
▁ were also very much the same — everywhere , all over the world , hundreds of 
▁ thousands of millions of people just like this , people ignorant of one another ’s 
▁ existence , held apart by walls of hatred and lies , and yet almost exactly the 
▁ same — people who had never learned to think but who were storing up in 
▁ their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that would one day overturn the 
▁ world . xxmaj if there was hope , it lay in the proles ! xxmaj without having read to the end 
▁ of the book , he knew that that must be xxmaj goldstein ’s final message . xxmaj the future 
▁ belonged to the proles . xxmaj and could he be sure that when their time came the 
▁ world they constructed would not be just as alien to him , xxmaj winston xxmaj smith , as 
▁ the world of the xxmaj party ? xxmaj yes , because at the least it would be a world of sanity . 
▁ xxmaj where there is equality there can be sanity . xxmaj sooner or later it would happen , 
▁ strength would change into consciousness . xxmaj the proles were immortal , you could 
▁ not doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard . xxmaj in the end 
▁ their awakening would come . xxmaj and until that happened , though it might be a 
▁ thousand years , they would stay alive against all the odds , like birds , passing 
▁ on from body to body the vitality which the xxmaj party did not share and could not 
▁ kill . 
▁ ’ do you remember , ’ he said , ’ the thrush that sang to us , that first day , at 
▁ the edge of the wood ? ’ 
▁ ’ he was n’t singing to us , ’ said xxmaj julia . ’ he was singing to please himself . xxmaj not 
▁ even that . xxmaj he was just singing . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the birds sang , the proles sang . the xxmaj party did not sing . xxmaj all round the world , 
▁ in xxmaj london and xxmaj new xxmaj york , in xxmaj africa and xxmaj brazil , and in the mysterious , forbidden 
▁ lands beyond the frontiers , in the streets of xxmaj paris and xxmaj berlin , in the villages of the 
▁ endless xxmaj russian plain , in the bazaars of xxmaj china and xxmaj japan — everywhere stood 
▁ the same solid unconquerable figure , made monstrous by work and childbearing , 
▁ toiling from birth to death and still singing . xxmaj out of those mighty loins a race of 
▁ conscious beings must one day come . xxmaj you were the dead , theirs was the future . 
▁ xxmaj but you could share in that future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive 
▁ the body , and passed on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four . 
▁ ’ we are the dead , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ we are the dead , ’ echoed xxmaj julia dutifully . 
▁ ’ you are the dead , ’ said an iron voice behind them . 
▁ xxmaj they sprang apart . xxmaj winston ’s entrails seemed to have turned into ice . xxmaj he 
▁ could see the white all round the irises of xxmaj julia ’s eyes . xxmaj her face had turned a 
▁ milky yellow . xxmaj the smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone stood out 
▁ sharply , almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath . 
▁ ’ you are the dead , ’ repeated the iron voice . 
▁ ’ it was behind the picture , ’ breathed xxmaj julia . 
▁ ’ it was behind the picture , ’ said the voice . ’ remain exactly where you are . 
▁ xxmaj make no movement until you are ordered . ’ 
▁ xxmaj it was starting , it was starting at last ! xxmaj they could do nothing except stand 
▁ gazing into one another ’s eyes . xxmaj to run for life , to get out of the house before 
▁ it was too late — no such thought occurred to them . xxmaj unthinkable to disobey 
▁ the iron voice from the wall . xxmaj there was a snap as though a catch had been 
▁ 128 
▁ turned back , and a crash of breaking glass . xxmaj the picture had fallen to the floor 
▁ uncovering the telescreen behind it . 
▁ ’ now they can see us , ’ said xxmaj julia . 
▁ ’ xxmaj now we can see you , ’ said the voice . ’ xxmaj stand out in the middle of the room . 
▁ xxmaj stand back to back . xxmaj clasp your hands behind your heads . xxmaj do not touch one 
▁ another . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they were not touching , but it seemed to him that he could feel xxmaj julia ’s body 
▁ shaking . xxmaj or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own . xxmaj he could just stop 
▁ his teeth from chattering , but his knees were beyond his control . xxmaj there was a 
▁ sound of trampling boots below , inside the house and outside . xxmaj the yard seemed 
▁ to be full of men . xxmaj something was being dragged across the stones . xxmaj the woman ’s 
▁ singing had stopped abruptly . xxmaj there was a long , rolling clang , as though the 
▁ washtub had been flung across the yard , and then a confusion of angry shouts 
▁ which ended in a yell of pain . 
▁ ’ the house is surrounded , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ the house is surrounded , ’ said the voice . 
▁ xxmaj he heard xxmaj julia snap her teeth together . ’ i suppose we may as well say 
▁ good - bye , ’ she said . 
▁ ’ you may as well say good - bye , ’ said the voice . xxmaj and then another quite 
▁ different voice , a thin , cultivated voice which xxmaj winston had the impression of 
▁ having heard before , struck in ; ’ and by the way , while we are on the subject , 
▁ ” here comes a candle to light you to bed , here comes a chopper to chop off your 
▁ head ” ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj something crashed on to the bed behind xxmaj winston ’s back . xxmaj the head of a 
▁ ladder had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame . xxmaj someone was climbing through the window . xxmaj there was a stampede of boots up the 
▁ stairs . xxmaj the room was full of solid men in black uniforms , with iron - shod boots 
▁ on their feet and truncheons in their hands . 
▁ xxmaj winston was not trembling any longer . xxmaj even his eyes he barely moved . xxmaj one 
▁ thing alone mattered ; to keep still , to keep still and not give them an excuse 
▁ to hit you ! a man with a smooth prize - fighter ’s jowl in which the mouth was 
▁ only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon meditatively between 
▁ thumb and forefinger . xxmaj winston met his eyes . xxmaj the feeling of nakedness , with 
▁ one ’s hands behind one ’s head and one ’s face and body all exposed , was almost 
▁ unbearable . xxmaj the man protruded the tip of a white tongue , licked the place 
▁ where his lips should have been , and then passed on . xxmaj there was another crash . 
▁ xxmaj someone had picked up the glass paperweight from the table and smashed it to 
▁ pieces on the hearth - stone . 
▁ xxmaj the fragment of coral , a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rosebud from a cake , 
▁ rolled across the mat . xxmaj how small , thought xxmaj winston , how small it always was ! 
▁ xxmaj there was a gasp and a thump behind him , and he received a violent kick on 
▁ the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance . xxmaj one of the men had smashed 
▁ his fist into xxmaj julia ’s solar plexus , doubling her up like a pocket ruler . xxmaj she was 
▁ thrashing about on the floor , fighting for breath . xxmaj winston dared not turn his 
▁ head even by a millimetre , but sometimes her livid , gasping face came within 
▁ the angle of his vision . xxmaj even in his terror it was as though he could feel the pain 
▁ in his own body , the deadly pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the 
▁ struggle to get back her breath . xxmaj he knew what it was like ; the terrible , agonizing 
▁ pain which was there all the while but could not be suffered yet , because before 
▁ all else it was necessary to be able to breathe . xxmaj then two of the men hoisted 
▁ 129 
▁ her up by knees and shoulders , and carried her out of the room like a sack . 
▁ xxmaj winston had a glimpse of her face , upside down , yellow and contorted , with the 
▁ eyes shut , and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek ; and that was the last 
▁ he saw of her . 
▁ xxmaj he stood dead still . xxmaj no one had hit him yet . xxmaj thoughts which came of their 
▁ own accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through his mind . xxmaj he 
▁ wondered whether they had got xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington . xxmaj he wondered what they had 
▁ done to the woman in the yard . xxmaj he noticed that he badly wanted to urinate , 
▁ and felt a faint surprise , because he had done so only two or three hours ago . 
▁ xxmaj he noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine , meaning twenty - one . 
▁ xxmaj but the light seemed too strong . xxmaj would not the light be fading at twenty - one 
▁ hours on an xxmaj august evening ? xxmaj he wondered whether after all he and xxmaj julia had 
▁ mistaken the time — had slept the clock round and thought it was twenty - thirty 
▁ when really it was nought eight - thirty on the following morning . xxmaj but he did not 
▁ pursue the thought further . xxmaj it was not interesting . 
▁ xxmaj there ws another , lighter step in the passage . xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington came into 
▁ the room . xxmaj the demeanour of the black - uniformed men suddenly became more 
▁ subdued . xxmaj something had also changed in xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington ’s appearance . xxmaj his 
▁ eye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight . 
▁ ’ pick up those pieces , ’ he said sharply . 
▁ a man stooped to obey . xxmaj the cockney accent had disappeared ; xxmaj winston 
▁ suddenly realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on 
▁ the telescreen . xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket , but his 
▁ hair , which had been almost white , had turned black . xxmaj also he was not wearing 
▁ his spectacles . xxmaj he gave xxmaj winston a single sharp glance , as though verifying his 
▁ identity , and then paid no more attention to him . xxmaj he was still recognizable , 
▁ but he was not the same person any longer . xxmaj his body had straightened , and 
▁ seemed to have grown bigger . xxmaj his face had undergone only tiny changes that 
▁ had nevertheless worked a complete transformation . xxmaj the black eyebrows were 
▁ less bushy , the wrinkles were gone , the whole lines of the face seemed to have 
▁ altered ; even the nose seemed shorter . xxmaj it was the alert , cold face of a man of 
▁ about five - and - thirty . xxmaj it occurred to xxmaj winston that for the first time in his life 
▁ he was looking , with knowledge , at a member of the xxmaj thought xxmaj police . 
▁ 130 
▁ xxmaj chapter 18 
▁ xxmaj he did not know where he was . xxmaj presumably he was in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , 
▁ but there was no way of making certain . xxmaj he was in a high - ceilinged windowless 
▁ cell with walls of glittering white porcelain . xxmaj concealed lamps flooded it with 
▁ cold light , and there was a low , steady humming sound which he supposed had 
▁ something to do with the air supply . a bench , or shelf , just wide enough to sit 
▁ on ran round the wall , broken only by the door and , at the end opposite the 
▁ door , a lavatory pan with no wooden seat . xxmaj there were four telescreens , one in 
▁ each wall . 
▁ xxmaj there was a dull aching in his belly . xxmaj it had been there ever since they had 
▁ bundled him into the closed van and driven him away . xxmaj but he was also hungry , 
▁ with a gnawing , unwholesome kind of hunger . xxmaj it might be twenty - four hours 
▁ since he had eaten , it might be thirty - six . xxmaj he still did not know , probably never 
▁ would know , whether it had been morning or evening when they arrested him . 
▁ xxmaj since he was arrested he had not been fed . 
▁ xxmaj he sat as still as he could on the narrow bench , with his hands crossed on his 
▁ knee . xxmaj he had already learned to sit still . xxmaj if you made unexpected movements 
▁ they yelled at you from the telescreen . xxmaj but the craving for food was growing 
▁ upon him . xxmaj what he longed for above all was a piece of bread . xxmaj he had an idea 
▁ that there were a few breadcrumbs in the pocket of his overalls . xxmaj it was even 
▁ possible — he thought this because from time to time something seemed to 
▁ tickle his leg — that there might be a sizeable bit of crust there . xxmaj in the end the 
▁ temptation to find out overcame his fear ; he slipped a hand into his pocket . 
▁ ’ smith ! ’ yelled a voice from the telescreen . ’ 6079 xxmaj smith xxup w. ! xxmaj hands out of 
▁ pockets in the cells ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj he sat still again , his hands crossed on his knee . xxmaj before being brought here 
▁ he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary prison 
▁ or a temporary lock - up used by the patrols . xxmaj he did not know how long he 
▁ had been there ; some hours at any rate ; with no clocks and no daylight it was 
▁ hard to gauge the time . xxmaj it was a noisy , evil - smelling place . xxmaj they had put him 
▁ into a cell similar to the one he was now in , but filthily dirty and at all times 
▁ crowded by ten or fifteen people . xxmaj the majority of them were common criminals , 
▁ but there were a few political prisoners among them . xxmaj he had sat silent against 
▁ the wall , jostled by dirty bodies , too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his 
▁ belly to take much interest in his surroundings , but still noticing the astonishing 
▁ difference in demeanour between the xxmaj party prisoners and the others . xxmaj the xxmaj party 
▁ prisoners were always silent and terrified , but the ordinary criminals seemed 
▁ to care nothing for anybody . xxmaj they yelled insults at the guards , fought back 
▁ 131 
▁ fiercely when their belongings were impounded , wrote obscene words on the 
▁ floor , ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious hiding - places in 
▁ their clothes , and even shouted down the telescreen when it tried to restore 
▁ order . xxmaj on the other hand some of them seemed to be on good terms with 
▁ the guards , called them by nicknames , and tried to wheedle cigarettes through 
▁ the spyhole in the door . xxmaj the guards , too , treated the common criminals with 
▁ a certain forbearance , even when they had to handle them roughly . xxmaj there 
▁ was much talk about the forced - labour camps to which most of the prisoners 
▁ expected to be sent . xxmaj it was ’ all right ’ in the camps , he gathered , so long as you 
▁ had good contacts and knew the ropes . xxmaj there was bribery , favouritism , and 
▁ racketeering of every kind , there was homosexuality and prostitution , there was 
▁ even illicit alcohol distilled from potatoes . xxmaj the positions of trust were given 
▁ only to the common criminals , especially the gangsters and the murderers , who 
▁ formed a sort of aristocracy . xxmaj all the dirty jobs were done by the politicals . 
▁ xxmaj there was a constant come - and - go of prisoners of every description : drugpeddlers , thieves , bandits , black - marketeers , drunks , prostitutes . xxmaj some of the 
▁ drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine to suppress 
▁ them . xxmaj an enormous wreck of a woman , aged about sixty , with great tumbling 
▁ breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down in her struggles , 
▁ was carried in , kicking and shouting , by four guards , who had hold of her one 
▁ at each corner . xxmaj they wrenched off the boots with which she had been trying 
▁ to kick them , and dumped her down across xxmaj winston ’s lap , almost breaking his 
▁ thigh - bones . xxmaj the woman hoisted herself upright and followed them out with a 
▁ yell of ’ f — bastards ! ’ xxmaj then , noticing that she was sitting on something uneven , 
▁ she slid off xxmaj winston ’s knees on to the bench . 
▁ ’ beg pardon , dearie , ’ she said . ’ i would n’t ’ a sat on you , only the buggers 
▁ put me there . xxmaj they dono ’ ow to treat a lady , do they ? ’ xxmaj she paused , patted her 
▁ breast , and belched . ’ pardon , ’ she said , ’ i ai n’t meself , quite . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor . 
▁ ’ thass better , ’ she said , leaning back with closed eyes . ’ never keep it down , 
▁ thass what i say . xxmaj get it up while it ’s fresh on your stomach , like . ’ 
▁ xxmaj she revived , turned to have another look at xxmaj winston and seemed immediately to take a fancy to him . xxmaj she put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew 
▁ him towards her , breathing beer and vomit into his face . 
▁ ’ wass your name , dearie ? ’ she said . 
▁ ’ smith , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ smith ? ’ said the woman . ’ thass funny . xxmaj my name ’s xxmaj smith too . xxmaj why , ’ she 
▁ added sentimentally , ’ i might be your mother ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj she might , thought xxmaj winston , be his mother . xxmaj she was about the right age 
▁ and physique , and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty 
▁ years in a forced - labour camp . 
▁ xxmaj no one else had spoken to him . xxmaj to a surprising extent the ordinary criminals 
▁ ignored the xxmaj party prisoners . ’ the polits , ’ they called them , with a sort of 
▁ uninterested contempt . xxmaj the xxmaj party prisoners seemed terrified of speaking to 
▁ anybody , and above all of speaking to one another . xxmaj only once , when two xxmaj party 
▁ members , both women , were pressed close together on the bench , he overheard 
▁ amid the din of voices a few hurriedly - whispered words ; and in particular a 
▁ reference to something called ’ room one - oh - one ’ , which he did not understand . 
▁ xxmaj it might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here . xxmaj the dull 
▁ pain in his belly never went away , but sometimes it grew better and sometimes 
▁ 132 
▁ worse , and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly . xxmaj when it grew 
▁ worse he thought only of the pain itself , and of his desire for food . xxmaj when it 
▁ grew better , panic took hold of him . xxmaj there were moments when he foresaw the 
▁ things that would happen to him with such actuality that his heart galloped 
▁ and his breath stopped . xxmaj he felt the smash of truncheons on his elbows and 
▁ iron - shod boots on his shins ; he saw himself grovelling on the floor , screaming 
▁ for mercy through broken teeth . xxmaj he hardly thought of xxmaj julia . xxmaj he could not fix 
▁ his mind on her . xxmaj he loved her and would not betray her ; but that was only 
▁ a fact , known as he knew the rules of arithmetic . xxmaj he felt no love for her , and 
▁ he hardly even wondered what was happening to her . xxmaj he thought oftener of 
▁ o’brien , with a flickering hope . o’brien might know that he had been arrested . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj brotherhood , he had said , never tried to save its members . xxmaj but there was 
▁ the razor blade ; they would send the razor blade if they could . xxmaj there would 
▁ be perhaps five seconds before the guard could rush into the cell . xxmaj the blade 
▁ would bite into him with a sort of burning coldness , and even the fingers that 
▁ held it would be cut to the bone . xxmaj everything came back to his sick body , which 
▁ shrank trembling from the smallest pain . xxmaj he was not certain that he would use 
▁ the razor blade even if he got the chance . xxmaj it was more natural to exist from 
▁ moment to moment , accepting another ten minutes ’ life even with the certainty 
▁ that there was torture at the end of it . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the walls 
▁ of the cell . xxmaj it should have been easy , but he always lost count at some point 
▁ or another . xxmaj more often he wondered where he was , and what time of day it 
▁ was . xxmaj at one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight outside , and 
▁ at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness . xxmaj in this place , he knew 
▁ instinctively , the lights would never be turned out . xxmaj it was the place with no 
▁ darkness : he saw now why o’brien had seemed to recognize the allusion . xxmaj in 
▁ the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love there were no windows . xxmaj his cell might be at the heart of 
▁ the building or against its outer wall ; it might be ten floors below ground , or 
▁ thirty above it . xxmaj he moved himself mentally from place to place , and tried to 
▁ determine by the feeling of his body whether he was perched high in the air or 
▁ buried deep underground . 
▁ xxmaj there was a sound of marching boots outside . xxmaj the steel door opened with a 
▁ clang . a young officer , a trim black - uniformed figure who seemed to glitter all 
▁ over with polished leather , and whose pale , straight - featured face was like a wax 
▁ mask , stepped smartly through the doorway . xxmaj he motioned to the guards outside 
▁ to bring in the prisoner they were leading . xxmaj the poet xxmaj ampleforth shambled into 
▁ the cell . xxmaj the door clanged shut again . 
▁ xxmaj ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from side to side , as 
▁ though having some idea that there was another door to go out of , and then 
▁ began to wander up and down the cell . xxmaj he had not yet noticed xxmaj winston ’s 
▁ presence . xxmaj his troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above the 
▁ level of xxmaj winston ’s head . xxmaj he was shoeless ; large , dirty toes were sticking out of 
▁ the holes in his socks . xxmaj he was also several days away from a shave . a scrubby 
▁ beard covered his face to the cheekbones , giving him an air of ruffianism that 
▁ went oddly with his large weak frame and nervous movements . 
▁ xxmaj winston roused hirnself a little from his lethargy . xxmaj he must speak to xxmaj ampleforth , and risk the yell from the telescreen . xxmaj it was even conceivable that 
▁ xxmaj ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade . 
▁ ’ ampleforth , ’ he said . 
▁ 133 
▁ xxmaj there was no yell from the telescreen . xxmaj ampleforth paused , mildly startled . 
▁ xxmaj his eyes focused themselves slowly on xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ ah , xxmaj smith ! ’ he said . ’ you too ! ’ 
▁ ’ what are you in for ? ’ 
▁ ’ to tell you the truth — ’ xxmaj he sat down awkwardly on the bench opposite 
▁ xxmaj winston . ’ there is only one offence , is there not ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ and have you committed it ? ’ 
▁ ’ apparently i have . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment , as 
▁ though trying to remember something . 
▁ ’ these things happen , ’ he began vaguely . ’ i have been able to recall one 
▁ instance — a possible instance . xxmaj it was an indiscretion , undoubtedly . xxmaj we were 
▁ producing a definitive edition of the poems of xxmaj kipling . i allowed the word ” god ” 
▁ to remain at the end of a line . i could not help it ! ’ he added almost indignantly , 
▁ raising his face to look at xxmaj winston . ’ it was impossible to change the line . xxmaj the 
▁ rhyme was ” rod ” . xxmaj do you realize that there are only twelve rhymes to ” rod ” 
▁ in the entire language ? xxmaj for days i had racked my brains . xxmaj there was no other 
▁ rhyme . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the expression on his face changed . xxmaj the annoyance passed out of it and for 
▁ a moment he looked almost pleased . a sort of intellectual warmth , the joy of 
▁ the pedant who has found out some useless fact , shone through the dirt and 
▁ scrubby hair . 
▁ ’ has it ever occurred to you , ’ he said , ’ that the whole history of xxmaj english 
▁ poetry has been determined by the fact that the xxmaj english language lacks rhymes ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj no , that particular thought had never occurred to xxmaj winston . xxmaj nor , in the 
▁ circumstances , did it strike him as very important or interesting . 
▁ ’ do you know what time of day it is ? ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj ampleforth looked startled again . ’ i had hardly thought about it . xxmaj they 
▁ arrested me — it could be two days ago — perhaps three . ’ xxmaj his eyes flitted round 
▁ the walls , as though he half expected to find a window somewhere . ’ there is 
▁ no difference between night and day in this place . i do not see how one can 
▁ calculate the time . ’ 
▁ xxmaj they talked desultorily for some minutes , then , without apparent reason , 
▁ a yell from the telescreen bade them be silent . xxmaj winston sat quietly , his hands 
▁ crossed . xxmaj ampleforth , too large to sit in comfort on the narrow bench , fidgeted 
▁ from side to side , clasping his lank hands first round one knee , then round 
▁ the other . xxmaj the telescreen barked at him to keep still . xxmaj time passed . xxmaj twenty 
▁ minutes , an hour — it was difficult to judge . xxmaj once more there was a sound of 
▁ boots outside . xxmaj winston ’s entrails contracted . xxmaj soon , very soon , perhaps in five 
▁ minutes , perhaps now , the tramp of boots would mean that his own turn had 
▁ come . 
▁ xxmaj the door opened . xxmaj the cold - faced young officer stepped into the cell . xxmaj with 
▁ a brief movement of the hand he indicated xxmaj ampleforth . 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards , his face vaguely perturbed , but uncomprehending . 
▁ xxmaj what seemed like a long time passed . xxmaj the pain in xxmaj winston ’s belly had 
▁ revived . xxmaj his mind sagged round and round on the same trick , like a ball falling 
▁ again and again into the same series of slots . xxmaj he had only six thoughts . xxmaj the 
▁ pain in his belly ; a piece of bread ; the blood and the screaming ; o’brien ; xxmaj julia ; 
▁ 134 
▁ the razor blade . xxmaj there was another spasm in his entrails , the heavy boots were 
▁ approaching . xxmaj as the door opened , the wave of air that it created brought in 
▁ a powerful smell of cold sweat . xxmaj parsons walked into the cell . xxmaj he was wearing 
▁ khaki shorts and a sports - shirt . 
▁ xxmaj this time xxmaj winston was startled into self - forgetfulness . 
▁ ’ you here ! ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj parsons gave xxmaj winston a glance in which there was neither interest nor surprise , but only misery . xxmaj he began walking jerkily up and down , evidently unable 
▁ to keep still . xxmaj each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was apparent that 
▁ they were trembling . xxmaj his eyes had a wide - open , staring look , as though he could 
▁ not prevent himself from gazing at something in the middle distance . 
▁ ’ what are you in for ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ thoughtcrime ! ’ said xxmaj parsons , almost blubbering . xxmaj the tone of his voice 
▁ implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous horror 
▁ that such a word could be applied to himself . xxmaj he paused opposite xxmaj winston and 
▁ began eagerly appealing to him : ’ you do n’t think they ’ll shoot me , do you , 
▁ old chap ? xxmaj they do n’t shoot you if you have n’t actually done anything — only 
▁ thoughts , which you ca n’t help ? i know they give you a fair hearing . xxmaj oh , i 
▁ trust them for that ! xxmaj they ’ll know my record , wo n’t they ? xxmaj you know what kind 
▁ of chap i was . xxmaj not a bad chap in my way . xxmaj not brainy , of course , but keen . i 
▁ tried to do my best for the xxmaj party , did n’t xxup i ? xxmaj i ’ll get off with five years , do n’t you 
▁ think ? xxmaj or even ten years ? a chap like me could make himself pretty useful in 
▁ a labour - camp . xxmaj they would n’t shoot me for going off the rails just once ? ’ 
▁ ’ are you guilty ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ of course xxmaj i ’ m guilty ! ’ cried xxmaj parsons with a servile glance at the telescreen . 
▁ ’ you do n’t think the xxmaj party would arrest an innocent man , do you ? ’ xxmaj his froglike face grew calmer , and even took on a slightly sanctimonious expression . 
▁ ’ thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing , old man , ’ he said sententiously . ’ it ’s insidious . xxmaj it can get hold of you without your even knowing it . xxmaj do you know how 
▁ it got hold of me ? xxmaj in my sleep ! xxmaj yes , that ’s a fact . xxmaj there i was , working away , 
▁ trying to do my bit — never knew i had any bad stuff in my mind at all . xxmaj and 
▁ then i started talking in my sleep . xxmaj do you know what they heard me saying ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he sank his voice , like someone who is obliged for medical reasons to utter 
▁ an obscenity . 
▁ ” down with xxmaj big xxmaj brother ! ” xxmaj yes , i said that ! xxmaj said it over and over again , it 
▁ seems . xxmaj between you and me , old man , xxmaj i ’ m glad they got me before it went any 
▁ further . xxmaj do you know what xxmaj i ’ m going to say to them when i go up before the 
▁ tribunal ? ” thank you , ” xxmaj i ’ m going to say , ” thank you for saving me before it 
▁ was too late . ” 
▁ ’ who denounced you ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ it was my little daughter , ’ said xxmaj parsons with a sort of doleful pride . ’ she 
▁ listened at the keyhole . xxmaj heard what i was saying , and nipped off to the patrols 
▁ the very next day . xxmaj pretty smart for a nipper of seven , eh ? i do n’t bear her any 
▁ grudge for it . xxmaj in fact xxmaj i ’ m proud of her . xxmaj it shows i brought her up in the right 
▁ spirit , anyway . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he made a few more jerky movements up and down , several times , casting 
▁ a longing glance at the lavatory pan . xxmaj then he suddenly ripped down his shorts . 
▁ ’ excuse me , old man , ’ he said . ’ i ca n’t help it . xxmaj it ’s the waiting . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan . xxmaj winston covered his 
▁ face with his hands . 
▁ 135 
▁ ’ smith ! ’ yelled the voice from the telescreen . ’ 6079 xxmaj smith xxup w ! xxmaj uncover your 
▁ face . xxmaj no faces covered in the cells . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston uncovered his face . xxmaj parsons used the lavatory , loudly and abundantly . xxmaj it then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell stank abominably for hours afterwards . 
▁ xxmaj parsons was removed . xxmaj more prisoners came and went , mysteriously . xxmaj one , a 
▁ woman , was consigned to ’ room 101 ’ , and , xxmaj winston noticed , seemed to shrivel 
▁ and turn a different colour when she heard the words . a time came when , if 
▁ it had been morning when he was brought here , it would be afternoon ; or if 
▁ it had been afternoon , then it would be midnight . xxmaj there were six prisoners in 
▁ the cell , men and women . xxmaj all sat very still . xxmaj opposite xxmaj winston there sat a man 
▁ with a chinless , toothy face exactly like that of some large , harmless rodent . 
▁ xxmaj his fat , mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom that it was difficult not 
▁ to believe that he had little stores of food tucked away there . xxmaj his pale - grey 
▁ eyes flitted timorously from face to face and turned quickly away again when 
▁ he caught anyone ’s eye . 
▁ xxmaj the door opened , and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance 
▁ sent a momentary chill through xxmaj winston . xxmaj he was a commonplace , mean - looking 
▁ man who might have been an engineer or technician of some kind . xxmaj but what 
▁ was startling was the emaciation of his face . xxmaj it was like a skull . xxmaj because of 
▁ its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large , and the eyes 
▁ seemed filled with a murderous , unappeasable hatred of somebody or something . 
▁ xxmaj the man sat down on the bench at a little distance from xxmaj winston . xxmaj winston 
▁ did not look at him again , but the tormented , skull - like face was as vivid in his 
▁ mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyes . xxmaj suddenly he realized 
▁ what was the matter . xxmaj the man was dying of starvation . xxmaj the same thought 
▁ seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the cell . xxmaj there was a 
▁ very faint stirring all the way round the bench . xxmaj the eyes of the chinless man 
▁ kept flitting towards the skull - faced man , then turning guiltily away , then being 
▁ dragged back by an irresistible attraction . xxmaj presently he began to fidget on his 
▁ seat . xxmaj at last he stood up , waddled clumsily across the cell , dug down into the 
▁ pocket of his overalls , and , with an abashed air , held out a grimy piece of bread 
▁ to the skull- faced man . 
▁ xxmaj there was a furious , deafening roar from the telescreen . xxmaj the chinless man 
▁ jumped in his tracks . xxmaj the skull - faced man had quickly thrust his hands behind 
▁ his back , as though demonstrating to all the world that he refused the gift . 
▁ ’ bumstead ! ’ roared the voice . ’ 2713 xxmaj bumstead xxup j. ! xxmaj let fall that piece of 
▁ bread ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj the chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor . 
▁ ’ remain standing where you are , ’ said the voice . ’ face the door . xxmaj make no 
▁ movement . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the chinless man obeyed . xxmaj his large pouchy cheeks were quivering uncontrollably . xxmaj the door clanged open . xxmaj as the young officer entered and stepped aside , 
▁ there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with enormous arms and 
▁ shoulders . xxmaj he took his stand opposite the chinless man , and then , at a signal 
▁ from the officer , let free a frightful blow , with all the weight of his body behind 
▁ it , full in the chinless man ’s mouth . xxmaj the force of it seemed almost to knock him 
▁ clear of the floor . xxmaj his body was flung across the cell and fetched up against the 
▁ base of the lavatory seat . xxmaj for a moment he lay as though stunned , with dark 
▁ blood oozing from his mouth and nose . a very faint whimpering or squeaking , 
▁ 136 
▁ which seemed unconscious , came out of him . xxmaj then he rolled over and raised 
▁ himself unsteadily on hands and knees . xxmaj amid a stream of blood and saliva , the 
▁ two halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth . 
▁ xxmaj the prisoners sat very still , their hands crossed on their knees . xxmaj the chinless man climbed back into his place . xxmaj down one side of his face the flesh was 
▁ darkening . xxmaj his mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry - coloured mass with a 
▁ black hole in the middle of it . 
▁ xxmaj from time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overalls . xxmaj his 
▁ grey eyes still flitted from face to face , more guiltily than ever , as though he 
▁ were trying to discover how much the others despised him for his humiliation . 
▁ xxmaj the door opened . xxmaj with a small gesture the officer indicated the skull - faced 
▁ man . 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj there was a gasp and a flurry at xxmaj winston ’s side . xxmaj the man had actually 
▁ flung himself on his knees on the floor , with his hand clasped together . 
▁ ’ comrade ! xxmaj officer ! ’ he cried . ’ you do n’t have to take me to that place ! 
▁ xxmaj have n’t i told you everything already ? xxmaj what else is it you want to know ? 
▁ xxmaj there ’s nothing i would n’t confess , nothing ! xxmaj just tell me what it is and xxmaj i ’ll 
▁ confess straight off . xxmaj write it down and xxmaj i ’ll sign it — anything ! xxmaj not room 101 ! ’ 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ said the officer . 
▁ xxmaj the man ’s face , already very pale , turned a colour xxmaj winston would not have 
▁ believed possible . xxmaj it was definitely , unmistakably , a shade of green . 
▁ ’ do anything to me ! ’ he yelled . ’ you ’ ve been starving me for weeks . xxmaj finish 
▁ it off and let me die . xxmaj shoot me . xxmaj hang me . xxmaj sentence me to twenty - five years . xxmaj is 
▁ there somebody else you want me to give away ? xxmaj just say who it is and xxmaj i ’ll tell 
▁ you anything you want . i do n’t care who it is or what you do to them . xxmaj i ’ ve got 
▁ a wife and three children . xxmaj the biggest of them is n’t six years old . xxmaj you can take 
▁ the whole lot of them and cut their throats in front of my eyes , and xxmaj i ’ll stand 
▁ by and watch it . xxmaj but not xxmaj room 101 ! ’ 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ said the officer . 
▁ xxmaj the man looked frantically round at the other prisoners , as though with 
▁ some idea that he could put another victim in his own place . xxmaj his eyes settled 
▁ on the smashed face of the chinless man . xxmaj he flung out a lean arm . 
▁ ’ that ’s the one you ought to be taking , not me ! ’ he shouted . ’ you did n’t 
▁ hear what he was saying after they bashed his face . xxmaj give me a chance and xxmaj i ’ll 
▁ tell you every word of it . xxmaj he ’s the one that ’s against the xxmaj party , not me . ’ xxmaj the 
▁ guards stepped forward . xxmaj the man ’s voice rose to a shriek . ’ you did n’t hear 
▁ him ! ’ he repeated . ’ something went wrong with the telescreen . xxmaj he ’s the one 
▁ you want . xxmaj take him , not me ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj the two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms . xxmaj but just at 
▁ this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one of the 
▁ iron legs that supported the bench . xxmaj he had set up a wordless howling , like an 
▁ animal . xxmaj the guards took hold of him to wrench him loose , but he clung on with 
▁ astonishing strength . xxmaj for perhaps twenty seconds they were hauling at him . 
▁ xxmaj the prisoners sat quiet , their hands crossed on their knees , looking straight in 
▁ front of them . xxmaj the howling stopped ; the man had no breath left for anything 
▁ except hanging on . xxmaj then there was a different kind of cry . a kick from a guard ’s 
▁ boot had broken the fingers of one of his hands . xxmaj they dragged him to his feet . 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ said the officer . 
▁ 137 
▁ xxmaj the man was led out , walking unsteadily , with head sunken , nursing his 
▁ crushed hand , all the fight had gone out of him . 
▁ a long time passed . xxmaj if it had been midnight when the skull - faced man was 
▁ taken away , it was morning : if morning , it was afternoon . xxmaj winston was alone , 
▁ and had been alone for hours . xxmaj the pain of sitting on the narrow bench was such 
▁ that often he got up and walked about , unreproved by the telescreen . xxmaj the piece 
▁ of bread still lay where the chinless man had dropped it . xxmaj at the beginning it 
▁ needed a hard effort not to look at it , but presently hunger gave way to thirst . 
▁ xxmaj his mouth was sticky and evil - tasting . xxmaj the humming sound and the unvarying 
▁ white light induced a sort of faintness , an empty feeling inside his head . xxmaj he 
▁ would get up because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable , and then 
▁ would sit down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of 
▁ staying on his feet . xxmaj whenever his physical sensations were a little under control 
▁ the terror returned . xxmaj sometimes with a fading hope he thought of o’brien and 
▁ the razor blade . xxmaj it was thinkable that the razor blade might arrive concealed 
▁ in his food , if he were ever fed . xxmaj more dimly he thought of xxmaj julia . xxmaj somewhere or 
▁ other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he . xxmaj she might be screaming with 
▁ pain at this moment . xxmaj he thought : ’ if i could save xxmaj julia by doubling my own 
▁ pain , would i do it ? xxmaj yes , i would . ’ xxmaj but that was merely an intellectual decision , 
▁ taken because he knew that he ought to take it . xxmaj he did not feel it . xxmaj in this place 
▁ you could not feel anything , except pain and foreknowledge of pain . xxmaj besides , 
▁ was it possible , when you were actually suffering it , to wish for any reason that 
▁ your own pain should increase ? xxmaj but that question was not answerable yet . 
▁ xxmaj the boots were approaching again . xxmaj the door opened . o’brien came in . 
▁ xxmaj winston started to his feet . xxmaj the shock of the sight had driven all caution out 
▁ of him . xxmaj for the first time in many years he forgot the presence of the telescreen . 
▁ ’ they ’ ve got you too ! ’ he cried . 
▁ ’ they got me a long time ago , ’ said o’brien with a mild , almost regretful 
▁ irony . xxmaj he stepped aside . from behind him there emerged a broad - chested guard 
▁ with a long black truncheon in his hand . 
▁ ’ you know him , xxmaj winston , ’ said o’brien . ’ do n’t deceive yourself . xxmaj you did 
▁ know it — you have always known it . ’ 
▁ xxmaj yes , he saw now , he had always known it . xxmaj but there was no time to think of 
▁ that . xxmaj all he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard ’s hand . xxmaj it might fall 
▁ anywhere ; on the crown , on the tip of the ear , on the upper arm , on the elbowthe elbow ! xxmaj he had slumped to his knees , almost paralysed , clasping the 
▁ stricken elbow with his other hand . xxmaj everything had exploded into yellow light . 
▁ xxmaj inconceivable , inconceivable that one blow could cause such pain ! xxmaj the light 
▁ cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him . xxmaj the guard was 
▁ laughing at his contortions . xxmaj one question at any rate was answered . xxmaj never , for 
▁ any reason on earth , could you wish for an increase of pain . xxmaj of pain you could 
▁ wish only one thing : that it should stop . xxmaj nothing in the world was so bad as 
▁ physical pain . xxmaj in the face of pain there are no heroes , no heroes , he thought 
▁ over and over as he writhed on the floor , clutching uselessly at his disabled left 
▁ arm . 
▁ 138 
▁ xxmaj chapter 19 
▁ xxmaj he was lying on something that felt like a camp bed , except that it was higher 
▁ off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he could not 
▁ move . xxmaj light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face . o’brien 
▁ was standing at his side , looking down at him intently . xxmaj at the other side of him 
▁ stood a man in a white coat , holding a hypodermic syringe . 
▁ xxmaj even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually . 
▁ xxmaj he had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite different 
▁ world , a sort of underwater world far beneath it . xxmaj how long he had been down 
▁ there he did not know . xxmaj since the moment when they arrested him he had not 
▁ seen darkness or daylight . xxmaj besides , his memories were not continuous . xxmaj there 
▁ had been times when consciousness , even the sort of consciousness that one 
▁ has in sleep , had stopped dead and started again after a blank interval . xxmaj but 
▁ whether the intervals were of days or weeks or only seconds , there was no way 
▁ of knowing . 
▁ xxmaj with that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started . xxmaj later he 
▁ was to realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary , a routine 
▁ interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected . xxmaj there was a long 
▁ range of crimes — espionage , sabotage , and the like — to which everyone had 
▁ to confess as a matter of course . xxmaj the confession was a formality , though the 
▁ torture was real . xxmaj how many times he had been beaten , how long the beatings 
▁ had continued , he could not remember . xxmaj always there were five or six men in 
▁ black uniforms at him simultaneously . xxmaj sometimes it was fists , sometimes it was 
▁ truncheons , sometimes it was steel rods , sometimes it was boots . xxmaj there were 
▁ times when he rolled about the floor , as shameless as an animal , writhing his 
▁ body this way and that in an endless , hopeless effort to dodge the kicks , and 
▁ simply inviting more and yet more kicks , in his ribs , in his belly , on his elbows , 
▁ on his shins , in his groin , in his testicles , on the bone at the base of his spine . 
▁ xxmaj there were times when it went on and on until the cruel , wicked , unforgivable 
▁ thing seemed to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he 
▁ could not force hirnself into losing consciousness . xxmaj there were times when his 
▁ nerve so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating 
▁ began , when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough to make 
▁ him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes . xxmaj there were other 
▁ times when he started out with the resolve of confessing nothing , when every 
▁ word had to be forced out of him between gasps of pain , and there were times 
▁ when he feebly tried to compromise , when he said to himself : ’ i will confess , but 
▁ not yet . i must hold out till the pain becomes unbearable . xxmaj three more kicks , 
▁ 139 
▁ two more kicks , and then i will tell them what they want . ’ xxmaj sometimes he was 
▁ beaten till he could hardly stand , then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the 
▁ stone floor of a cell , left to recuperate for a few hours , and then taken out and 
▁ beaten again . xxmaj there were also longer periods of recovery . xxmaj he remembered them 
▁ dimly , because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor . xxmaj he remembered a cell 
▁ with a plank bed , a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall , and a tin washbasin , and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee . xxmaj he remembered 
▁ a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hair , and businesslike , 
▁ unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulse , tapping his reflexes , turning 
▁ up his eyelids , running harsh fingers over him in search for broken bones , and 
▁ shooting needles into his arm to make him sleep . 
▁ xxmaj the beatings grew less frequent , and became mainly a threat , a horror to 
▁ which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers were unsatisfactory . xxmaj his questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms but xxmaj party 
▁ intellectuals , little rotund men with quick movements and flashing spectacles , 
▁ who worked on him in relays over periods which lasted — he thought , he could 
▁ not be sure — ten or twelve hours at a stretch . xxmaj these other questioners saw 
▁ to it that he was in constant slight pain , but it was not chiefly pain that they 
▁ relied on . xxmaj they slapped his face , wrung his ears . pulled his hair , made him 
▁ stand on one leg , refused him leave to urinate , shone glaring lights in his face 
▁ until his eyes ran with water ; but the aim of this was simply to humiliate him 
▁ and destroy his power of arguing and reasoning . xxmaj their real weapon was the 
▁ merciless questioning that went on and on , hour after hour , tripping him up , 
▁ laying traps for him , twisting everything that he said , convicting him at every 
▁ step of lies and self - contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame 
▁ as from nervous fatigue xxmaj sometimes he would weep half a dozen times in a single 
▁ session . xxmaj most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened at every 
▁ hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again ; but sometimes they would 
▁ suddenly change their tune , call him comrade , appeal to him in the name of 
▁ xxmaj ingsoc and xxmaj big xxmaj brother , and ask him sorrowfully whether even now he had not 
▁ enough loyalty to the xxmaj party left to make him wish to undo the evil he had done . 
▁ xxmaj when his nerves were in rags after hours of questioning , even this appeal could 
▁ reduce him to snivelling tears . xxmaj in the end the nagging voices broke him down 
▁ more completely than the boots and fists of the guards . xxmaj he became simply a 
▁ mouth that uttered , a hand that signed , whatever was demanded of him . xxmaj his 
▁ sole concern was to find out what they wanted him to confess , and then confess 
▁ it quickly , before the bullying started anew . xxmaj he confessed to the assassination of 
▁ eminent xxmaj party members , the distribution of seditious pamphlets , embezzlement 
▁ of public funds , sale of military secrets , sabotage of every kind . xxmaj he confessed 
▁ that he had been a spy in the pay of the xxmaj eastasian government as far back as 
▁ 1968 . xxmaj he confessed that he was a religious believer , an admirer of capitalism , 
▁ and a sexual pervert . xxmaj he confessed that he had murdered his wife , although 
▁ he knew , and his questioners must have known , that his wife was still alive . 
▁ xxmaj he confessed that for years he had been in personal touch with xxmaj goldstein and 
▁ had been a member of an underground organization which had included almost 
▁ every human being he had ever known . xxmaj it was easier to confess everything and 
▁ implicate everybody . xxmaj besides , in a sense it was all true . xxmaj it was true that he 
▁ had been the enemy of the xxmaj party , and in the eyes of the xxmaj party there was no 
▁ distinction between the thought and the deed . 
▁ xxmaj there were also memories of another kind . xxmaj they stood out in his mind 
▁ 140 
▁ disconnectedly , like pictures with blackness all round them . 
▁ xxmaj he was in a cell which might have been either dark or light , because he could 
▁ see nothing except a pair of eyes . xxmaj near at hand some kind of instrument was 
▁ ticking slowly and regularly . xxmaj the eyes grew larger and more luminous . xxmaj suddenly 
▁ he floated out of his seat , dived into the eyes , and was swallowed up . 
▁ xxmaj he was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials , under dazzling lights . a 
▁ man in a white coat was reading the dials . xxmaj there was a tramp of heavy boots 
▁ outside . xxmaj the door clanged open . xxmaj the waxed - faced officer marched in , followed 
▁ by two guards . 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ said the officer . 
▁ xxmaj the man in the white coat did not turn round . xxmaj he did not look at xxmaj winston 
▁ either ; he was looking only at the dials . 
▁ xxmaj he was rolling down a mighty corridor , a kilometre wide , full of glorious , 
▁ golden light , roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at the top of 
▁ his voice . xxmaj he was confessing everything , even the things he had succeeded in 
▁ holding back under the torture . xxmaj he was relating the entire history of his life 
▁ to an audience who knew it already . xxmaj with him were the guards , the other 
▁ questioners , the men in white coats , o’brien , xxmaj julia , xxmaj mr xxmaj charrington , all rolling 
▁ down the corridor together and shouting with laughter . xxmaj some dreadful thing 
▁ which had lain embedded in the future had somehow been skipped over and had 
▁ not happened . xxmaj everything was all right , there was no more pain , the last detail 
▁ of his life was laid bare , understood , forgiven . 
▁ xxmaj he was starting up from the plank bed in the half - certainty that he had 
▁ heard o’brien ’s voice . xxmaj all through his interrogation , although he had never 
▁ seen him , he had had the feeling that o’brien was at his elbow , just out of 
▁ sight . xxmaj it was o’brien who was directing everything . xxmaj it was he who set the 
▁ guards on to xxmaj winston and who prevented them from killing him . xxmaj it was he 
▁ who decided when xxmaj winston should scream with pain , when he should have a 
▁ respite , when he should be fed , when he should sleep , when the drugs should 
▁ be pumped into his arm . xxmaj it was he who asked the questions and suggested the 
▁ answers . xxmaj he was the tormentor , he was the protector , he was the inquisitor , 
▁ he was the friend . xxmaj and once — xxmaj winston could not remember whether it was 
▁ in drugged sleep , or in normal sleep , or even in a moment of wakefulness — a 
▁ voice murmured in his ear : ’ do n’t worry , xxmaj winston ; you are in my keeping . xxmaj for 
▁ seven years i have watched over you . xxmaj now the turning - point has come . i shall 
▁ save you , i shall make you perfect . ’ xxmaj he was not sure whether it was o’brien ’s 
▁ voice ; but it was the same voice that had said to him , ’ we shall meet in the 
▁ place where there is no darkness , ’ in that other dream , seven years ago . 
▁ xxmaj he did not remember any ending to his interrogation . xxmaj there was a period 
▁ of blackness and then the cell , or room , in which he now was had gradually 
▁ materialized round him . xxmaj he was almost flat on his back , and unable to move . 
▁ xxmaj his body was held down at every essential point . xxmaj even the back of his head 
▁ was gripped in some manner . o’brien was looking down at him gravely and 
▁ rather sadly . xxmaj his face , seen from below , looked coarse and worn , with pouches 
▁ under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin . xxmaj he was older than xxmaj winston 
▁ had thought him ; he was perhaps forty - eight or fifty . xxmaj under his hand there was 
▁ a dial with a lever on top and figures running round the face . 
▁ ’ i told you , ’ said o’brien , ’ that if we met again it would be here . ’ 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ xxmaj without any warning except a slight movement of o’brien ’s hand , a wave of 
▁ 141 
▁ pain flooded his body . xxmaj it was a frightening pain , because he could not see what 
▁ was happening , and he had the feeling that some mortal injury was being done 
▁ to him . xxmaj he did not know whether the thing was really happening , or whether 
▁ the effect was electrically produced ; but his body was being wrenched out of 
▁ shape , the joints were being slowly torn apart . xxmaj although the pain had brought 
▁ the sweat out on his forehead , the worst of all was the fear that his backbone 
▁ was about to snap . xxmaj he set his teeth and breathed hard through his nose , trying 
▁ to keep silent as long as possible . 
▁ ’ you are afraid , ’ said o’brien , watching his face , ’ that in another moment 
▁ something is going to break . xxmaj your especial fear is that it will be your backbone . 
▁ xxmaj you have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart and the spinal 
▁ fluid dripping out of them . xxmaj that is what you are thinking , is it not , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston did not answer . o’brien drew back the lever on the dial . xxmaj the wave 
▁ of pain receded almost as quickly as it had come . 
▁ ’ that was forty , ’ said o’brien . ’ you can see that the numbers on this dial 
▁ run up to a hundred . xxmaj will you please remember , throughout our conversation , 
▁ that i have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to whatever 
▁ degree i choose ? xxmaj if you tell me any lies , or attempt to prevaricate in any way , 
▁ or even fall below your usual level of intelligence , you will cry out with pain , 
▁ instantly . xxmaj do you understand that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien ’s manner became less severe . xxmaj he resettled his spectacles thoughtfully , and took a pace or two up and down . xxmaj when he spoke his voice was gentle 
▁ and patient . xxmaj he had the air of a doctor , a teacher , even a priest , anxious to 
▁ explain and persuade rather than to punish . 
▁ ’ i am taking trouble with you , xxmaj winston , ’ he said , ’ because you are worth 
▁ trouble . xxmaj you know perfectly well what is the matter with you . xxmaj you have known 
▁ it for years , though you have fought against the knowledge . xxmaj you are mentally 
▁ deranged . xxmaj you suffer from a defective memory . xxmaj you are unable to remember 
▁ real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other events which 
▁ never happened . xxmaj fortunately it is curable . xxmaj you have never cured yourself of it , 
▁ because you did not choose to . xxmaj there was a small effort of the will that you 
▁ were not ready to make . xxmaj even now , i am well aware , you are clinging to your 
▁ disease under the impression that it is a virtue . xxmaj now we will take an example . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment , which power is xxmaj oceania at war with ? ’ 
▁ ’ when i was arrested , xxmaj oceania was at war with xxmaj eastasia . 
▁ ’ with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj good . xxmaj and xxmaj oceania has always been at war with xxmaj eastasia , 
▁ has it not ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston drew in his breath . xxmaj he opened his mouth to speak and then did 
▁ not speak . xxmaj he could not take his eyes away from the dial . 
▁ ’ the truth , please , xxmaj winston . xxmaj your truth . xxmaj tell me what you think you 
▁ remember . ’ 
▁ ’ i remember that until only a week before i was arrested , we were not at 
▁ war with xxmaj eastasia at all . xxmaj we were in alliance with them . xxmaj the war was against 
▁ xxmaj eurasia . xxmaj that had lasted for four years . xxmaj before that — ’ 
▁ o’brien stopped him with a movement of the hand . 
▁ ’ another example , ’ he said . ’ some years ago you had a very serious delusion 
▁ indeed . xxmaj you believed that three men , three one - time xxmaj party members named 
▁ xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford men who were executed for treachery and 
▁ sabotage after making the fullest possible confession — were not guilty of the 
▁ 142 
▁ crimes they were charged with . xxmaj you believed that you had seen unmistakable 
▁ documentary evidence proving that their confessions were false . xxmaj there was a 
▁ certain photograph about which you had a hallucination . xxmaj you believed that you 
▁ had actually held it in your hands . xxmaj it was a photograph something like this . ’ 
▁ xxmaj an oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between o’brien ’s fingers . xxmaj for 
▁ perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of xxmaj winston ’s vision . xxmaj it was a 
▁ photograph , and there was no question of its identity . xxmaj it was the photograph . 
▁ xxmaj it was another copy of the photograph of xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford at 
▁ the party function in xxmaj new xxmaj york , which he had chanced upon eleven years ago 
▁ and promptly destroyed . xxmaj for only an instant it was before his eyes , then it was 
▁ out of sight again . xxmaj but he had seen it , unquestionably he had seen it ! xxmaj he made 
▁ a desperate , agonizing effort to wrench the top half of his body free . xxmaj it was 
▁ impossible to move so much as a centimetre in any direction . xxmaj for the moment 
▁ he had even forgotten the dial . xxmaj all he wanted was to hold the photograph in 
▁ his fingers again , or at least to see it . 
▁ ’ it exists ! ’ he cried . 
▁ ’ no , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj he stepped across the room . xxmaj there was a memory hole in the opposite wall . 
▁ o’brien lifted the grating . xxmaj unseen , the frail slip of paper was whirling away on 
▁ the current of warm air ; it was vanishing in a flash of flame . o’brien turned 
▁ away from the wall . 
▁ ’ ashes , ’ he said . ’ not even identifiable ashes . xxmaj dust . xxmaj it does not exist . xxmaj it 
▁ never existed . ’ 
▁ ’ but it did exist ! xxmaj it does exist ! xxmaj it exists in memory . i remember it . xxmaj you 
▁ remember it . ’ 
▁ ’ i do not remember it , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s heart sank . xxmaj that was doublethink . xxmaj he had a feeling of deadly 
▁ helplessness . xxmaj if he could have been certain that o’brien was lying , it would not 
▁ have seemed to matter . xxmaj but it was perfectly possible that o’brien had really 
▁ forgotten the photograph . xxmaj and if so , then already he would have forgotten his 
▁ denial of remembering it , and forgotten the act of forgetting . xxmaj how could one be 
▁ sure that it was simple trickery ? xxmaj perhaps that lunatic dislocation in the mind 
▁ could really happen : that was the thought that defeated him . 
▁ o’brien was looking down at him speculatively . xxmaj more than ever he had the 
▁ air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child . 
▁ ’ there is a xxmaj party slogan dealing with the control of the past , ’ he said . ’ repeat 
▁ it , if you please . ’ 
▁ ” who controls the past controls the future : who controls the present controls 
▁ the past , ” repeated xxmaj winston obediently . 
▁ ” who controls the present controls the past , ” said o’brien , nodding his 
▁ head with slow approval . ’ is it your opinion , xxmaj winston , that the past has real 
▁ existence ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj again the feeling of helplessness descended upon xxmaj winston . xxmaj his eyes flitted 
▁ towards the dial . xxmaj he not only did not know whether ’ yes ’ or ’ no ’ was the answer 
▁ that would save him from pain ; he did not even know which answer he believed 
▁ to be the true one . 
▁ o’brien smiled faintly . ’ you are no metaphysician , xxmaj winston , ’ he said . ’ until 
▁ this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence . i will put it 
▁ more precisely . xxmaj does the past exist concretely , in space ? xxmaj is there somewhere or 
▁ other a place , a world of solid objects , where the past is still happening ? ’ 
▁ 143 
▁ ’ no . ’ 
▁ ’ then where does the past exist , if at all ? ’ 
▁ ’ in records . xxmaj it is written down . ’ 
▁ ’ in records . xxmaj and- ? ’ 
▁ ’ in the mind . xxmaj in human memories . 
▁ ’ in memory . xxmaj very well , then . xxmaj we , the xxmaj party , control all records , and we 
▁ control all memories . xxmaj then we control the past , do we not ? ’ 
▁ ’ but how can you stop people remembering things ? ’ cried xxmaj winston again 
▁ momentarily forgetting the dial . ’ it is involuntary . xxmaj it is outside oneself . xxmaj how 
▁ can you control memory ? xxmaj you have not controlled mine ! ’ 
▁ o’brien ’s manner grew stern again . xxmaj he laid his hand on the dial . 
▁ ’ on the contrary , ’ he said , ’ you have not controlled it . xxmaj that is what has 
▁ brought you here . xxmaj you are here because you have failed in humility , in selfdiscipline . xxmaj you would not make the act of submission which is the price of 
▁ sanity . xxmaj you preferred to be a lunatic , a minority of one . xxmaj only the disciplined 
▁ mind can see reality , xxmaj winston . xxmaj you believe that reality is something objective , 
▁ external , existing in its own right . xxmaj you also believe that the nature of reality 
▁ is self - evident . xxmaj when you delude yourself into thinking that you see something , 
▁ you assume that everyone else sees the same thing as you . xxmaj but i tell you , 
▁ xxmaj winston , that reality is not external . xxmaj reality exists in the human mind , and 
▁ nowhere else . xxmaj not in the individual mind , which can make mistakes , and in 
▁ any case soon perishes : only in the mind of the xxmaj party , which is collective and 
▁ immortal . xxmaj whatever the xxmaj party holds to be the truth , is truth . xxmaj it is impossible 
▁ to see reality except by looking through the eyes of the xxmaj party . xxmaj that is the fact 
▁ that you have got to relearn , xxmaj winston . xxmaj it needs an act of self - destruction , an 
▁ effort of the will . xxmaj you must humble yourself before you can become sane . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused for a few moments , as though to allow what he had been saying 
▁ to sink in . 
▁ ’ do you remember , ’ he went on , ’ writing in your diary , ” freedom is the 
▁ freedom to say that two plus two make four ” ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien held up his left hand , its back towards xxmaj winston , with the thumb 
▁ hidden and the four fingers extended . 
▁ ’ how many fingers am i holding up , xxmaj winston ? 
▁ ’ four . ’ 
▁ ’ and if the party says that it is not four but five — then how many ? ’ 
▁ ’ four . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the word ended in a gasp of pain . xxmaj the needle of the dial had shot up to 
▁ fifty - five . xxmaj the sweat had sprung out all over xxmaj winston ’s body . xxmaj the air tore into 
▁ his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his teeth he 
▁ could not stop . o’brien watched him , the four fingers still extended . xxmaj he drew 
▁ back the lever . xxmaj this time the pain was only slightly eased . 
▁ ’ how many fingers , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ four . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the needle went up to sixty . 
▁ ’ how many fingers , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ four ! xxmaj four ! xxmaj what else can i say ? xxmaj four ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj the needle must have risen again , but he did not look at it . xxmaj the heavy , stern 
▁ face and the four fingers filled his vision . xxmaj the fingers stood up before his eyes 
▁ like pillars , enormous , blurry , and seeming to vibrate , but unmistakably four . 
▁ 144 
▁ ’ how many fingers , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ four ! xxmaj stop it , stop it ! xxmaj how can you go on ? xxmaj four ! xxmaj four ! ’ 
▁ ’ how many fingers , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ five ! xxmaj five ! xxmaj five ! ’ 
▁ ’ no , xxmaj winston , that is no use . xxmaj you are lying . xxmaj you still think there are four . 
▁ xxmaj how many fingers , please ? ’ 
▁ ’ four ! five ! xxmaj four ! xxmaj anything you like . xxmaj only stop it , stop the pain ! 
▁ xxmaj abruptly he was sitting up with o’brien ’s arm round his shoulders . xxmaj he 
▁ had perhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds . xxmaj the bonds that had held his 
▁ body down were loosened . xxmaj he felt very cold , he was shaking uncontrollably , his 
▁ teeth were chattering , the tears were rolling down his cheeks . xxmaj for a moment 
▁ he clung to o’brien like a baby , curiously comforted by the heavy arm round 
▁ his shoulders . xxmaj he had the feeling that o’brien was his protector , that the pain 
▁ was something that came from outside , from some other source , and that it was 
▁ o’brien who would save him from it . 
▁ ’ you are a slow learner , xxmaj winston , ’ said o’brien gently . 
▁ ’ how can i help it ? ’ he blubbered . ’ how can i help seeing what is in front 
▁ of my eyes ? xxmaj two and two are four . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes , xxmaj winston . xxmaj sometimes they are five . xxmaj sometimes they are three . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes they are all of them at once . xxmaj you must try harder . xxmaj it is not easy to 
▁ become sane . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he laid xxmaj winston down on the bed . xxmaj the grip of his limbs tightened again , but 
▁ the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped , leaving him merely 
▁ weak and cold . o’brien motioned with his head to the man in the white coat , 
▁ who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings . xxmaj the man in the white 
▁ coat bent down and looked closely into xxmaj winston ’s eyes , felt his pulse , laid an 
▁ ear against his chest , tapped here and there , then he nodded to o’brien . 
▁ ’ again , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj the pain flowed into xxmaj winston ’s body . xxmaj the needle must be at seventy , 
▁ seventy - five . xxmaj he had shut his eyes this time . xxmaj he knew that the fingers were 
▁ still there , and still four . xxmaj all that mattered was somehow to stay alive until the 
▁ spasm was over . xxmaj he had ceased to notice whether he was crying out or not . xxmaj the 
▁ pain lessened again . xxmaj he opened his eyes . o’brien had drawn back the lever . 
▁ ’ how many fingers , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ four . i suppose there are four . i would see five if i could . i am trying to 
▁ see five . ’ 
▁ ’ which do you wish : to persuade me that you see five , or really to see them ? ’ 
▁ ’ really to see them . ’ 
▁ ’ again , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps the needle was eighty — ninety . xxmaj winston could not intermittently 
▁ remember why the pain was happening . xxmaj behind his screwed - up eyelids a forest of 
▁ fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance , weaving in and out , disappearing 
▁ behind one another and reappearing again . xxmaj he was trying to count them , he 
▁ could not remember why . xxmaj he knew only that it was impossible to count them , 
▁ and that this was somehow due to the mysterious identity between five and 
▁ four . xxmaj the pain died down again . xxmaj when he opened his eyes it was to find that 
▁ he was still seeing the same thing . xxmaj innumerable fingers , like moving trees , were 
▁ still streaming past in either direction , crossing and recrossing . xxmaj he shut his eyes 
▁ again . 
▁ ’ how many fingers am i holding up , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ 145 
▁ ’ i do n’t know . i do n’t know . xxmaj you will kill me if you do that again . xxmaj four , 
▁ five , six — in all honesty i do n’t know . ’ 
▁ ’ better , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ a needle slid into xxmaj winston ’s arm . xxmaj almost in the same instant a blissful , healing warmth spread all through his body . xxmaj the pain was already half - forgotten . 
▁ xxmaj he opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at o’brien . xxmaj at sight of the heavy , 
▁ lined face , so ugly and so intelligent , his heart seemed to turn over . xxmaj if he could 
▁ have moved he would have stretched out a hand and laid it on o’brien arm . xxmaj he 
▁ had never loved him so deeply as at this moment , and not merely because he 
▁ had stopped the pain . xxmaj the old feeling , that it bottom it did not matter whether 
▁ o’brien was a friend or an enemy , had come back . o’brien was a person who 
▁ could be talked to . xxmaj perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be 
▁ understood . o’brien had tortured him to the edge of lunacy , and in a little 
▁ while , it was certain , he would send him to his death . xxmaj it made no difference . xxmaj in 
▁ some sense that went deeper than friendship , they were intimates : somewhere 
▁ or other , although the actual words might never be spoken , there was a place 
▁ where they could meet and talk . o’brien was looking down at him with an 
▁ expression which suggested that the same thought might be in his own mind . 
▁ xxmaj when he spoke it was in an easy , conversational tone . 
▁ ’ do you know where you are , xxmaj winston ? ’ he said . 
▁ ’ i do n’t know . i can guess . xxmaj in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love . ’ 
▁ ’ do you know how long you have been here ? ’ 
▁ ’ i do n’t know . xxmaj days , weeks , months — i think it is months . ’ 
▁ ’ and why do you imagine that we bring people to this place ? ’ 
▁ ’ to make them confess . ’ 
▁ ’ no , that is not the reason . xxmaj try again . ’ 
▁ ’ to punish them . ’ 
▁ ’ no ! ’ exclaimed o’brien . xxmaj his voice had changed extraordinarily , and his face 
▁ had suddenly become both stern and animated . ’ no ! xxmaj not merely to extract your 
▁ confession , not to punish you . xxmaj shall i tell you why we have brought you here ? xxmaj to 
▁ cure you ! xxmaj to make you sane ! xxmaj will you understand , xxmaj winston , that no one whom 
▁ we bring to this place ever leaves our hands uncured ? xxmaj we are not interested in 
▁ those stupid crimes that you have committed . xxmaj the xxmaj party is not interested in 
▁ the overt act : the thought is all we care about . xxmaj we do not merely destroy our 
▁ enemies , we change them . xxmaj do you understand what i mean by that ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he was bending over xxmaj winston . xxmaj his face looked enormous because of its 
▁ nearness , and hideously ugly because it was seen from below . xxmaj moreover it 
▁ was filled with a sort of exaltation , a lunatic intensity . xxmaj again xxmaj winston ’s heart 
▁ shrank . xxmaj if it had been possible he would have cowered deeper into the bed . xxmaj he 
▁ felt certain that o’brien was about to twist the dial out of sheer wantonness . 
▁ xxmaj at this moment , however , o’brien turned away . xxmaj he took a pace or two up and 
▁ down . xxmaj then he continued less vehemently : 
▁ ’ the first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no 
▁ martyrdoms . xxmaj you have read of the religious persecutions of the past . xxmaj in the 
▁ xxmaj middle xxmaj ages there was the xxmaj inquisitlon . xxmaj it was a failure . xxmaj it set out to eradicate 
▁ heresy , and ended by perpetuating it . xxmaj for every heretic it burned at the stake , 
▁ thousands of others rose up . xxmaj why was that ? xxmaj because the xxmaj inquisition killed 
▁ its enemies in the open , and killed them while they were still unrepentant : in 
▁ fact , it killed them because they were unrepentant . xxmaj men were dying because 
▁ they would not abandon their true beliefs . xxmaj naturally all the glory belonged 
▁ 146 
▁ to the victim and all the shame to the xxmaj inquisitor who burned him . xxmaj later , in 
▁ the twentieth century , there were the totalitarians , as they were called . xxmaj there 
▁ were the xxmaj german xxmaj nazis and the xxmaj russian xxmaj communists . xxmaj the xxmaj russians persecuted 
▁ heresy more cruelly than the xxmaj inquisition had done . xxmaj and they imagined that 
▁ they had learned from the mistakes of the past ; they knew , at any rate , that 
▁ one must not make martyrs . xxmaj before they exposed their victims to public trial , 
▁ they deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity . xxmaj they wore them down 
▁ by torture and solitude until they were despicable , cringing wretches , confessing 
▁ whatever was put into their mouths , covering themselves with abuse , accusing 
▁ and sheltering behind one another , whimpering for mercy . xxmaj and yet after only a 
▁ few years the same thing had happened over again . xxmaj the dead men had become 
▁ martyrs and their degradation was forgotten . xxmaj once again , why was it ? xxmaj in the 
▁ first place , because the confessions that they had made were obviously extorted 
▁ and untrue . xxmaj we do not make mistakes of that kind . xxmaj all the confessions that 
▁ are uttered here are true . xxmaj we make them true . xxmaj and above all we do not allow 
▁ the dead to rise up against us . xxmaj you must stop imagining that posterity will 
▁ vindicate you , xxmaj winston . xxmaj posterity will never hear of you . xxmaj you will be lifted 
▁ clean out from the stream of history . xxmaj we shall turn you into gas and pour you 
▁ into the stratosphere . xxmaj nothing will remain of you , not a name in a register , not 
▁ a memory in a living brain . xxmaj you will be annihilated in the past as well as in the 
▁ future . xxmaj you will never have existed . ’ 
▁ xxmaj then why bother to torture me ? thought xxmaj winston , with a momentary bitterness . o’brien checked his step as though xxmaj winston had uttered the thought 
▁ aloud . xxmaj his large ugly face came nearer , with the eyes a little narrowed . 
▁ ’ you are thinking , ’ he said , ’ that since we intend to destroy you utterly , so 
▁ that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference — in that case , 
▁ why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first ? xxmaj that is what you were 
▁ thinking , was it not ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien smiled slightly . ’ you are a flaw in the pattern , xxmaj winston . xxmaj you are a 
▁ stain that must be wiped out . xxmaj did i not tell you just now that we are different 
▁ from the persecutors of the past ? xxmaj we are not content with negative obedience , 
▁ nor even with the most abject submission . xxmaj when finally you surrender to us , 
▁ it must be of your own free will . xxmaj we do not destroy the heretic because he 
▁ resists us : so long as he resists us we never destroy him . xxmaj we convert him , we 
▁ capture his inner mind , we reshape him . xxmaj we burn all evil and all illusion out 
▁ of him ; we bring him over to our side , not in appearance , but genuinely , heart 
▁ and soul . xxmaj we make him one of ourselves before we kill him . xxmaj it is intolerable 
▁ to us that an erroneous thought should exist anywhere in the world , however 
▁ secret and powerless it may be . xxmaj even in the instant of death we can not permit 
▁ any deviation . xxmaj in the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic , 
▁ proclaiming his heresy , exulting in it . xxmaj even the victim of the xxmaj russian purges 
▁ could carry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passage 
▁ waiting for the bullet . xxmaj but we make the brain perfect before we blow it out . 
▁ xxmaj the command of the old despotisms was ” thou shalt not ” . xxmaj the command of the 
▁ totalitarians was ” thou shalt ” . xxmaj our command is ” thou art ” . xxmaj no one whom we 
▁ bring to this place ever stands out against us . xxmaj everyone is washed clean . xxmaj even 
▁ those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once believed — xxmaj jones , 
▁ xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford — in the end we broke them down . i took part 
▁ in their interrogation myself . i saw them gradually worn down , whimpering , 
▁ 147 
▁ grovelling , weeping — and in the end it was not with pain or fear , only with 
▁ penitence . xxmaj by the time we had finished with them they were only the shells of 
▁ men . xxmaj there was nothing left in them except sorrow for what they had done , and 
▁ love of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj it was touching to see how they loved him . xxmaj they begged 
▁ to be shot quickly , so that they could die while their minds were still clean . ’ 
▁ xxmaj his voice had grown almost dreamy . xxmaj the exaltation , the lunatic enthusiasm , was still in his face . xxmaj he is not pretending , thought xxmaj winston , he is not 
▁ a hypocrite , he believes every word he says . xxmaj what most oppressed him was 
▁ the consciousness of his own intellectual inferiority . xxmaj he watched the heavy yet 
▁ graceful form strolling to and fro , in and out of the range of his vision . o’brien 
▁ was a being in all ways larger than himself . xxmaj there was no idea that he had 
▁ ever had , or could have , that o’brien had not long ago known , examined , and 
▁ rejected . xxmaj his mind contained xxmaj winston ’s mind . xxmaj but in that case how could it be 
▁ true that o’brien was mad ? xxmaj it must be he , xxmaj winston , who was mad . o’brien 
▁ halted and looked down at him . xxmaj his voice had grown stern again . 
▁ ’ do not imagine that you will save yourself , xxmaj winston , however completely 
▁ you surrender to us . xxmaj no one who has once gone astray is ever spared . xxmaj and even 
▁ if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life , still you would never 
▁ escape from us . xxmaj what happens to you here is for ever . xxmaj understand that in 
▁ advance . xxmaj we shall crush you down to the point from which there is no coming 
▁ back . xxmaj things will happen to you from which you could not recover , if you lived 
▁ a thousand years . xxmaj never again will you be capable of ordinary human feeling . 
▁ xxmaj everything will be dead inside you . xxmaj never again will you be capable of love , 
▁ or friendship , or joy of living , or laughter , or curiosity , or courage , or integrity . 
▁ xxmaj you will be hollow . xxmaj we shall squeeze you empty , and then we shall fill you with 
▁ ourselves . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused and signed to the man in the white coat . xxmaj winston was aware 
▁ of some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head . 
▁ o’brien had sat down beside the bed , so that his face was almost on a level 
▁ with xxmaj winston ’s . 
▁ ’ three thousand , ’ he said , speaking over xxmaj winston ’s head to the man in the 
▁ white coat . 
▁ xxmaj two soft pads , which felt slightly moist , clamped themselves against xxmaj winston ’s temples . xxmaj he quailed . xxmaj there was pain coming , a new kind of pain . o’brien 
▁ laid a hand reassuringly , almost kindly , on his . 
▁ ’ this time it will not hurt , ’ he said . ’ keep your eyes fixed on mine . ’ 
▁ xxmaj at this moment there was a devastating explosion , or what seemed like an 
▁ explosion , though it was not certain whether there was any noise . xxmaj there was 
▁ undoubtedly a blinding flash of light . xxmaj winston was not hurt , only prostrated . 
▁ xxmaj although he had already been lying on his back when the thing happened , he 
▁ had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that position . a terrific 
▁ painless blow had flattened him out . xxmaj also something had happened inside his 
▁ head . xxmaj as his eyes regained their focus he remembered who he was , and where 
▁ he was , and recognized the face that was gazing into his own ; but somewhere 
▁ or other there was a large patch of emptiness , as though a piece had been taken 
▁ out of his brain . 
▁ ’ it will not last , ’ said o’brien . ’ look me in the eyes . xxmaj what country is 
▁ xxmaj oceania at war with ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston thought . xxmaj he knew what was meant by xxmaj oceania and that he himself 
▁ was a citizen of xxmaj oceania . xxmaj he also remembered xxmaj eurasia and xxmaj eastasia ; but who 
▁ 148 
▁ was at war with whom he did not know . xxmaj in fact he had not been aware that 
▁ there was any war . 
▁ ’ i do n’t remember . ’ 
▁ ’ oceania is at war with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj do you remember that now ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ oceania has always been at war with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj since the beginning of your 
▁ life , since the beginning of the xxmaj party , since the beginning of history , the war has 
▁ continued without a break , always the same war . xxmaj do you remember that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ xxmaj eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been 
▁ condemned to death for treachery . xxmaj you pretended that you had seen a piece of 
▁ paper which proved them innocent . xxmaj no such piece of paper ever existed . xxmaj you 
▁ invented it , and later you grew to believe in it . xxmaj you remember now the very 
▁ moment at which you first invented it . xxmaj do you remember that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ just now i held up the fingers of my hand to you . xxmaj you saw five fingers . xxmaj do 
▁ you remember that ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ o’brien held up the fingers of his left hand , with the thumb concealed . 
▁ ’ there are five fingers there . xxmaj do you see five fingers ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ xxmaj and he did see them , for a fleeting instant , before the scenery of his mind 
▁ changed . xxmaj he saw five fingers , and there was no deformity . xxmaj then everything 
▁ was normal again , and the old fear , the hatred , and the bewilderment came 
▁ crowding back again . xxmaj but there had been a moment — he did not know how 
▁ long , thirty seconds , perhaps — of luminous certainty , when each new suggestion 
▁ of o’brien ’s had filled up a patch of emptiness and become absolute truth , and 
▁ when two and two could have been three as easily as five , if that were what was 
▁ needed . xxmaj it had faded but before o’brien had dropped his hand ; but though 
▁ he could not recapture it , he could remember it , as one remembers a vivid 
▁ experience at some period of one ’s life when one was in effect a different person . 
▁ ’ you see now , ’ said o’brien , ’ that it is at any rate possible . ’ 
▁ ’ yes , ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien stood up with a satisfied air . xxmaj over to his left xxmaj winston saw the man 
▁ in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a syringe . 
▁ o’brien turned to xxmaj winston with a smile . xxmaj in almost the old manner he resettled 
▁ his spectacles on his nose . 
▁ ’ do you remember writing in your diary , ’ he said , ’ that it did not matter 
▁ whether i was a friend or an enemy , since i was at least a person who understood 
▁ you and could be talked to ? xxmaj you were right . i enjoy talking to you . xxmaj your mind 
▁ appeals to me . xxmaj it resembles my own mind except that you happen to be insane . 
▁ xxmaj before we bring the session to an end you can ask me a few questions , if you 
▁ choose . ’ 
▁ ’ any question i like ? ’ 
▁ ’ anything . ’ xxmaj he saw that xxmaj winston ’s eyes were upon the dial . ’ it is switched 
▁ off . xxmaj what is your first question ? ’ 
▁ ’ what have you done with xxmaj julia ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ o’brien smiled again . ’ she betrayed you , xxmaj winston . xxmaj immediately - unreservedly . 
▁ i have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly . xxmaj you would hardly 
▁ recognize her if you saw her . xxmaj all her rebelliousness , her deceit , her folly , her 
▁ 149 
▁ dirty - mindedness — everything has been burned out of her . xxmaj it was a perfect 
▁ conversion , a textbook case . ’ 
▁ ’ you tortured her ? ’ 
▁ o’brien left this unanswered . ’ next question , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ does xxmaj big xxmaj brother exist ? ’ 
▁ ’ of course he exists . xxmaj the xxmaj party exists . xxmaj big xxmaj brother is the embodiment of 
▁ the xxmaj party . ’ 
▁ ’ does he exist in the same way as i exist ? 
▁ ’ you do not exist , ’ said o’brien . 
▁ xxmaj once again the sense of helplessness assailed him . xxmaj he knew , or he could 
▁ imagine , the arguments which proved his own nonexistence ; but they were nonsense , they were only a play on words . xxmaj did not the statement , ’ you do not exist ’ , 
▁ contain a logical absurdity ? xxmaj but what use was it to say so ? xxmaj his mind shrivelled 
▁ as he thought of the unanswerable , mad arguments with which o’brien would 
▁ demolish him . 
▁ ’ i think i exist , ’ he said wearily . ’ i am conscious of my own identity . i was 
▁ born and i shall die . i have arms and legs . i occupy a particular point in space . 
▁ xxmaj no other solid object can occupy the same point simultaneously . xxmaj in that sense , 
▁ does xxmaj big xxmaj brother exist ? ’ 
▁ ’ it is of no importance . xxmaj he exists . ’ 
▁ ’ will xxmaj big xxmaj brother ever die ? ’ 
▁ ’ of course not . xxmaj how could he die ? xxmaj next question . ’ 
▁ ’ does the xxmaj brotherhood exist ? ’ 
▁ ’ that , xxmaj winston , you will never know . xxmaj if we choose to set you free when we 
▁ have finished with you , and if you live to be ninety years old , still you will never 
▁ learn whether the answer to that question is xxmaj yes or xxmaj no . xxmaj as long as you live it 
▁ will be an unsolved riddle in your mind . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston lay silent . xxmaj his breast rose and fell a little faster . xxmaj he still had not 
▁ asked the question that had come into his mind the first . xxmaj he had got to ask it , 
▁ and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it . xxmaj there was a trace of 
▁ amusement in o’brien ’s face . xxmaj even his spectacles seemed to wear an ironical 
▁ gleam . xxmaj he knows , thought xxmaj winston suddenly , he knows what i am going to ask ! 
▁ xxmaj at the thought the words burst out of him : 
▁ ’ what is in xxmaj room 101 ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj the expression on o’brien ’s face did not change . xxmaj he answered drily : 
▁ ’ you know what is in xxmaj room 101 , xxmaj winston . xxmaj everyone knows what is in xxmaj room 
▁ 101 . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he raised a finger to the man in the white coat . xxmaj evidently the session was 
▁ at an end . a needle jerked into xxmaj winston ’s arm . xxmaj he sank almost instantly into 
▁ deep sleep . 
▁ 150 
▁ xxmaj chapter 20 
▁ ’ there are three stages in your reintegration , ’ said o’brien . ’ there is learning , 
▁ there is understanding , and there is acceptance . xxmaj it is time for you to enter upon 
▁ the second stage . ’ 
▁ xxmaj as always , xxmaj winston was lying flat on his back . xxmaj but of late his bonds were 
▁ looser . xxmaj they still held him to the bed , but he could move his knees a little 
▁ and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from the elbow . 
▁ xxmaj the dial , also , had grown to be less of a terror . xxmaj he could evade its pangs if he 
▁ was quick - witted enough : it was chiefly when he showed stupidity that o’brien 
▁ pulled the lever . xxmaj sometimes they got through a whole session without use of 
▁ the dial . xxmaj he could not remember how many sessions there had been . xxmaj the whole 
▁ process seemed to stretch out over a long , indefinite time — weeks , possibly 
▁ — and the intervals between the sessions might sometimes have been days , 
▁ sometimes only an hour or two . 
▁ ’ as you lie there , ’ said o’brien , ’ you have often wondered you have even 
▁ asked me — why the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love should expend so much time and trouble 
▁ on you . xxmaj and when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially 
▁ the same question . xxmaj you could grasp the mechanics of the xxmaj society you lived in , 
▁ but not its underlying motives . xxmaj do you remember writing in your diary , ” i 
▁ understand how : i do not understand why ” ? xxmaj it was when you thought about 
▁ ” why ” that you doubted your own sanity . xxmaj you have read the book , xxmaj goldstein ’s 
▁ book , or parts of it , at least . xxmaj did it tell you anything that you did not know 
▁ already ? ’ 
▁ ’ you have read it ? ’ said xxmaj winston . 
▁ ’ i wrote it . xxmaj that is to say , i collaborated in writing it . xxmaj no book is produced 
▁ individually , as you know . ’ 
▁ ’ is it true , what it says ? ’ 
▁ ’ a description , yes . xxmaj the programme it sets forth is nonsense . xxmaj the secret 
▁ accumulation of knowledge — a gradual spread of enlightenment — ultimately 
▁ a proletarian rebellion — the overthrow of the xxmaj party . xxmaj you foresaw yourself that 
▁ that was what it would say . xxmaj it is all nonsense . xxmaj the proletarians will never revolt , 
▁ not in a thousand years or a million . xxmaj they can not . i do not have to tell you the 
▁ reason : you know it already . xxmaj if you have ever cherished any dreams of violent 
▁ insurrection , you must abandon them . xxmaj there is no way in which the xxmaj party can 
▁ be overthrown . xxmaj the rule of the xxmaj party is for ever . xxmaj make that the starting - point 
▁ of your thoughts . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he came closer to the bed . ’ for ever ! ’ he repeated . ’ and now let us get 
▁ back to the question of ” how ” and ” why ” . xxmaj you understand well enough how the 
▁ 151 
▁ xxmaj party maintains itself in power . xxmaj now tell me why we cling to power . xxmaj what is 
▁ our motive ? xxmaj why should we want power ? xxmaj go on , speak , ’ he added as xxmaj winston 
▁ remained silent . 
▁ xxmaj nevertheless xxmaj winston did not speak for another moment or two . a feeling 
▁ of weariness had overwhelmed him . xxmaj the faint , mad gleam of enthusiasm had 
▁ come back into o’brien ’s face . xxmaj he knew in advance what o’brien would say . 
▁ xxmaj that the xxmaj party did not seek power for its own ends , but only for the good 
▁ of the majority . xxmaj that it sought power because men in the mass were frail 
▁ cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth , and must 
▁ be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than 
▁ themselves . xxmaj that the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness , 
▁ and that , for the great bulk of mankind , happiness was better . xxmaj that the party 
▁ was the eternal guardian of the weak , a dedicated sect doing evil that good 
▁ might come , sacrificing its own happiness to that of others . xxmaj the terrible thing , 
▁ thought xxmaj winston , the terrible thing was that when o’brien said this he would 
▁ believe it . xxmaj you could see it in his face . o’brien knew everything . a thousand 
▁ times better than xxmaj winston he knew what the world was really like , in what 
▁ degradation the mass of human beings lived and by what lies and barbarities 
▁ the xxmaj party kept them there . xxmaj he had understood it all , weighed it all , and it 
▁ made no difference : all was justified by the ultimate purpose . xxmaj what can you 
▁ do , thought xxmaj winston , against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself , 
▁ who gives your arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy ? 
▁ ’ you are ruling over us for our own good , ’ he said feebly . ’ you believe that 
▁ human beings are not fit to govern themselves , and therefore- ’ 
▁ xxmaj he started and almost cried out . a pang of pain had shot through his body . 
▁ o’brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty - five . 
▁ ’ that was stupid , xxmaj winston , stupid ! ’ he said . ’ you should know better than 
▁ to say a thing like that . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he pulled the lever back and continued : 
▁ ’ now i will tell you the answer to my question . xxmaj it is this . xxmaj the xxmaj party seeks 
▁ power entirely for its own sake . xxmaj we are not interested in the good of others ; we 
▁ are interested solely in power . xxmaj not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness : 
▁ only power , pure power . xxmaj what pure power means you will understand presently . 
▁ xxmaj we are different from all the oligarchies of the past , in that we know what we 
▁ are doing . xxmaj all the others , even those who resembled ourselves , were- cowards 
▁ and hypocrites . xxmaj the xxmaj german xxmaj nazis and the xxmaj russian xxmaj communists came very 
▁ close to us in their methods , but they never had the courage to recognize their 
▁ own motives . xxmaj they pretended , perhaps they even believed , that they had seized 
▁ power unwillingly and for a limited time , and that just round the corner there 
▁ lay a paradise where human beings would be free and equal . xxmaj we are not like 
▁ that . xxmaj we know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing 
▁ it . xxmaj power is not a means , it is an end . xxmaj one does not establish a dictatorship in 
▁ order to safeguard a revolution ; one makes the revolution in order to establish 
▁ the dictatorship . xxmaj the object of persecution is persecution . xxmaj the object of torture 
▁ is torture . xxmaj the object of power is power . xxmaj now do you begin to understand me ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston was struck , as he had been struck before , by the tiredness of 
▁ o’brien ’s face . xxmaj it was strong and fleshy and brutal , it was full of intelligence 
▁ and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself helpless ; but it was 
▁ tired . xxmaj there were pouches under the eyes , the skin sagged from the cheekbones . 
▁ o’brien leaned over him , deliberately bringing the worn face nearer . 
▁ 152 
▁ ’ you are thinking , ’ he said , ’ that my face is old and tired . xxmaj you are thinking 
▁ that i talk of power , and yet i am not even able to prevent the decay of my 
▁ own body . xxmaj can you not understand , xxmaj winston , that the individual is only a cell ? 
▁ xxmaj the weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism . xxmaj do you die when you 
▁ cut your fingernails ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again , one 
▁ hand in his pocket . 
▁ ’ we are the priests of power , ’ he said . ’ god is power . xxmaj but at present power is 
▁ only a word so far as you are concerned . xxmaj it is time for you to gather some idea of 
▁ what power means . xxmaj the first thing you must realize is that power is collective . 
▁ xxmaj the individual only has power in so far as he ceases to be an individual . xxmaj you 
▁ know the xxmaj party slogan : ” freedom is xxmaj slavery ” . xxmaj has it ever occurred to you that 
▁ it is reversible ? xxmaj slavery is freedom . xxmaj alone — free — the human being is always 
▁ defeated . xxmaj it must be so , because every human being is doomed to die , which is 
▁ the greatest of all failures . xxmaj but if he can make complete , utter submission , if he 
▁ can escape from his identity , if he can merge himself in the xxmaj party so that he is 
▁ the xxmaj party , then he is all - powerful and immortal . xxmaj the second thing for you to 
▁ realize is that power is power over human beings . xxmaj over the body but , above all , 
▁ over the mind . xxmaj power over matter — external reality , as you would call it — is 
▁ not important . xxmaj already our control over matter is absolute . ’ 
▁ xxmaj for a moment xxmaj winston ignored the dial . xxmaj he made a violent effort to raise 
▁ himself into a sitting position , and merely succeeded in wrenching his body 
▁ painfully . 
▁ ’ but how can you control matter ? ’ he burst out . ’ you do n’t even control 
▁ the climate or the law of gravity . xxmaj and there are disease , pain , death- ’ 
▁ o’brien silenced him by a movement of his hand . ’ we control matter because 
▁ we control the mind . xxmaj reality is inside the skull . xxmaj you will learn by degrees , 
▁ xxmaj winston . xxmaj there is nothing that we could not do . xxmaj invisibility , levitation — 
▁ anything . i could float off this floor like a soap bubble if i wish to . i do not wish 
▁ to , because the xxmaj party does not wish it . xxmaj you must get rid of those nineteenthcentury ideas about the laws of xxmaj nature . xxmaj we make the laws of xxmaj nature . ’ 
▁ ’ but you do not ! xxmaj you are not even masters of this planet . xxmaj what about 
▁ xxmaj eurasia and xxmaj eastasia ? xxmaj you have not conquered them yet . ’ 
▁ ’ unimportant . xxmaj we shall conquer them when it suits us . xxmaj and if we did not , 
▁ what difference would it make ? xxmaj we can shut them out of existence . xxmaj oceania is 
▁ the world . ’ 
▁ ’ but the world itself is only a speck of dust . xxmaj and man is tiny helpless ! xxmaj how 
▁ long has he been in existence ? xxmaj for millions of years the earth was uninhabited . ’ 
▁ ’ nonsense . xxmaj the earth is as old as we are , no older . xxmaj how could it be older ? 
▁ xxmaj nothing exists except through human consciousness . ’ 
▁ ’ but the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals — mammoths and 
▁ mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever 
▁ heard of . ’ 
▁ ’ have you ever seen those bones , xxmaj winston ? xxmaj of course not . xxmaj nineteenthcentury biologists invented them . xxmaj before man there was nothing . xxmaj after man , if 
▁ he could come to an end , there would be nothing . xxmaj outside man there is nothing . ’ 
▁ ’ but the whole universe is outside us . xxmaj look at the stars ! xxmaj some of them are 
▁ a million light - years away . xxmaj they are out of our reach for ever . ’ 
▁ ’ what are the stars ? ’ said o’brien indifferently . ’ they are bits of fire a few 
▁ kilometres away . xxmaj we could reach them if we wanted to . xxmaj or we could blot them 
▁ 153 
▁ out . xxmaj the earth is the centre of the universe . xxmaj the sun and the stars go round it . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston made another convulsive movement . xxmaj this time he did not say 
▁ anything . o’brien continued as though answering a spoken objection : 
▁ ’ for certain purposes , of course , that is not true . xxmaj when we navigate the 
▁ ocean , or when we predict an eclipse , we often find it convenient to assume that 
▁ the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions upon millions of 
▁ kilometres away . xxmaj but what of it ? xxmaj do you suppose it is beyond us to produce a 
▁ dual system of astronomy ? xxmaj the stars can be near or distant , according as we 
▁ need them . xxmaj do you suppose our mathematicians are unequal to that ? xxmaj have you 
▁ forgotten doublethink ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston shrank back upon the bed . xxmaj whatever he said , the swift answer 
▁ crushed him like a bludgeon . xxmaj and yet he knew , he knew , that he was in the 
▁ right . xxmaj the belief that nothing exists outside your own mind — surely there 
▁ must be some way of demonstrating that it was false ? xxmaj had it not been exposed 
▁ long ago as a fallacy ? xxmaj there was even a name for it , which he had forgotten . a 
▁ faint smile twitched the corners of o’brien ’s mouth as he looked down at him . 
▁ ’ i told you , xxmaj winston , ’ he said , ’ that metaphysics is not your strong point . 
▁ xxmaj the word you are trying to think of is solipsism . xxmaj but you are mistaken . xxmaj this is 
▁ not solipsism . xxmaj collective solipsism , if you like . xxmaj but that is a different thing : in 
▁ fact , the opposite thing . xxmaj all this is a digression , ’ he added in a different tone . 
▁ ’ the real power , the power we have to fight for night and day , is not power over 
▁ things , but over men . ’ xxmaj he paused , and for a moment assumed again his air of 
▁ a schoolmaster questioning a promising pupil : ’ how does one man assert his 
▁ power over another , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston thought . ’ by making him suffer , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ exactly . xxmaj by making him suffer . xxmaj obedience is not enough . xxmaj unless he is suffering , how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not his own ? xxmaj power 
▁ is in inflicting pain and humiliation . xxmaj power is in tearing human minds to pieces 
▁ and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing . xxmaj do you 
▁ begin to see , then , what kind of world we are creating ? xxmaj it is the exact opposite 
▁ of the stupid hedonistic xxmaj utopias that the old reformers imagined . a world of 
▁ fear and treachery is torment , a world of trampling and being trampled upon , 
▁ a world which will grow not less but more merciless as it refines itself . xxmaj progress 
▁ in our world will be progress towards more pain . xxmaj the old civilizations claimed 
▁ that they were founded on love or justice . xxmaj ours is founded upon hatred . xxmaj in our 
▁ world there will be no emotions except fear , rage , triumph , and self - abasement . 
▁ xxmaj everything else we shall destroy everything . xxmaj already we are breaking down the 
▁ habits of thought which have survived from before the xxmaj revolution . xxmaj we have cut 
▁ the links between child and parent , and between man and man , and between 
▁ man and woman . xxmaj no one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend any longer . 
▁ xxmaj but in the future there will be no wives and no friends . xxmaj children will be taken 
▁ from their mothers at birth , as one takes eggs from a hen . xxmaj the sex instinct 
▁ will be eradicated . xxmaj procreation will be an annual formality like the renewal of a 
▁ ration card . xxmaj we shall abolish the orgasm . xxmaj our neurologists are at work upon it 
▁ now . xxmaj there will be no loyalty , except loyalty towards the xxmaj party . xxmaj there will be 
▁ no love , except the love of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj there will be no laughter , except the 
▁ laugh of triumph over a defeated enemy . xxmaj there will be no art , no literature , no 
▁ science . xxmaj when we are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science . xxmaj there 
▁ will be no distinction between beauty and ugliness . xxmaj there will be no curiosity , 
▁ no enjoyment of the process of life . xxmaj all competing pleasures will be destroyed . 
▁ 154 
▁ xxmaj but always — do not forget this , xxmaj winston — always there will be the intoxication of power , constantly increasing and constantly growing subtler . xxmaj always , at 
▁ every moment , there will be the thrill of victory , the sensation of trampling on 
▁ an enemy who is helpless . xxmaj if you want a picture of the future , imagine a boot 
▁ stamping on a human face — for ever . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused as though he expected xxmaj winston to speak . xxmaj winston had tried to 
▁ shrink back into the surface of the bed again . xxmaj he could not say anything . xxmaj his 
▁ heart seemed to be frozen . o’brien went on : 
▁ ’ and remember that it is for ever . xxmaj the face will always be there to be 
▁ stamped upon . xxmaj the heretic , the enemy of society , will always be there , so 
▁ that he can be defeated and humiliated over again . xxmaj everything that you have 
▁ undergone since you have been in our hands — all that will continue , and 
▁ worse . xxmaj the espionage , the betrayals , the arrests , the tortures , the executions , 
▁ the disappearances will never cease . xxmaj it will be a world of terror as much as a 
▁ world of triumph . xxmaj the more the xxmaj party is powerful , the less it will be tolerant : 
▁ the weaker the opposition , the tighter the despotism . xxmaj goldstein and his heresies 
▁ will live for ever . xxmaj every day , at every moment , they will be defeated , discredited , 
▁ ridiculed , spat upon and yet they will always survive . xxmaj this drama that i have 
▁ played out with you during seven years will be played out over and over again 
▁ generation after generation , always in subtler forms . xxmaj always we shall have the 
▁ heretic here at our mercy , screaming with pain , broken up , contemptible — 
▁ and in the end utterly penitent , saved from himself , crawling to our feet of his 
▁ own accord . xxmaj that is the world that we are preparing , xxmaj winston . a world of 
▁ victory after victory , triumph after triumph after triumph : an endless pressing , 
▁ pressing , pressing upon the nerve of power . xxmaj you are beginning , i can see , to 
▁ realize what that world will be like . xxmaj but in the end you will do more than 
▁ understand it . xxmaj you will accept it , welcome it , become part of it . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak . ’ you ca n’t ! ’ he said 
▁ weakly . 
▁ ’ what do you mean by that remark , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ you could not create such a world as you have just described . xxmaj it is a dream . 
▁ xxmaj it is impossible . ’ 
▁ ’ why ? ’ 
▁ ’ it is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty . xxmaj it 
▁ would never endure . ’ 
▁ ’ why not ? ’ 
▁ ’ it would have no vitality . xxmaj it would disintegrate . xxmaj it would commit suicide . ’ 
▁ ’ nonsense . xxmaj you are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting 
▁ than love . xxmaj why should it be ? xxmaj and if it were , what difference would that make ? 
▁ xxmaj suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster . xxmaj suppose that we quicken 
▁ the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty . xxmaj still what difference would 
▁ it make ? xxmaj can you not understand that the death of the individual is not death ? 
▁ xxmaj the party is immortal . ’ 
▁ xxmaj as usual , the voice had battered xxmaj winston into helplessness . xxmaj moreover he 
▁ was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement o’brien would twist the 
▁ dial again . xxmaj and yet he could not keep silent . xxmaj feebly , without arguments , with 
▁ nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of what o’brien had said , 
▁ he returned to the attack . 
▁ ’ i do n’t know — i do n’t care . xxmaj somehow you will fail . xxmaj something will defeat 
▁ you . xxmaj life will defeat you . ’ 
▁ 155 
▁ ’ we control life , xxmaj winston , at all its levels . xxmaj you are imagining that there is 
▁ something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and will 
▁ turn against us . xxmaj but we create human nature . xxmaj men are infinitely malleable . xxmaj or 
▁ perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the proletarians or the slaves 
▁ will arise and overthrow us . xxmaj put it out of your mind . xxmaj they are helpless , like the 
▁ animals . xxmaj humanity is the xxmaj party . xxmaj the others are outside — irrelevant . ’ 
▁ ’ i do n’t care . xxmaj in the end they will beat you . xxmaj sooner or later they will see 
▁ you for what you are , and then they will tear you to pieces . ’ 
▁ ’ do you see any evidence that that is happening ? xxmaj or any reason why it 
▁ should ? ’ 
▁ ’ no . i believe it . i know that you will fail . xxmaj there is something in the universe 
▁ — i do n’t know , some spirit , some principle — that you will never overcome . ’ 
▁ ’ do you believe in xxmaj god , xxmaj winston ? ’ 
▁ ’ no . ’ 
▁ ’ then what is it , this principle that will defeat us ? ’ 
▁ ’ i do n’t know . xxmaj the spirit of xxmaj man . ’ 
▁ ’ and do you consider yourself a man ? . ’ 
▁ ’ yes . ’ 
▁ ’ if you are a man , xxmaj winston , you are the last man . xxmaj your kind is extinct ; 
▁ we are the inheritors . xxmaj do you understand that you are alone ? xxmaj you are outside 
▁ history , you are non - existent . ’ xxmaj his manner changed and he said more harshly : 
▁ ’ and you consider yourself morally superior to us , with our lies and our cruelty ? ’ 
▁ ’ yes , i consider myself superior . ’ 
▁ o’brien did not speak . xxmaj two other voices were speaking . xxmaj after a moment 
▁ xxmaj winston recognized one of them as his own . xxmaj it was a sound - track of the conversation he had had with o’brien , on the night when he had enrolled himself 
▁ in the xxmaj brotherhood . xxmaj he heard himself promising to lie , to steal , to forge , to 
▁ murder , to encourage drug - taking and prostitution , to disseminate venereal diseases , to throw vitriol in a child ’s face . o’brien made a small impatient gesture , 
▁ as though to say that the demonstration was hardly worth making . xxmaj then he 
▁ turned a switch and the voices stopped . 
▁ ’ get up from that bed , ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj the bonds had loosened themselves . xxmaj winston lowered himself to the floor 
▁ and stood up unsteadily . 
▁ ’ you are the last man , ’ said o’brien . ’ you are the guardian of the human 
▁ spirit . xxmaj you shall see yourself as you are . xxmaj take off your clothes . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together . xxmaj the zip 
▁ fastener had long since been wrenched out of them . xxmaj he could not remember 
▁ whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at one 
▁ time . xxmaj beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish rags , just 
▁ recognizable as the remnants of underclothes . xxmaj as he slid them to the ground 
▁ he saw that there was a three - sided mirror at the far end of the room . xxmaj he 
▁ approached it , then stopped short . xxmaj an involuntary cry had broken out of him . 
▁ ’ go on , ’ said o’brien . ’ stand between the wings of the mirror . xxmaj you shall 
▁ see the side view as well . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he had stopped because he was frightened . a bowed , grey - coloured , skeletonlike thing was coming towards him . xxmaj its actual appearance was frightening , and 
▁ not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself . xxmaj he moved closer to the glass . 
▁ xxmaj the creature ’s face seemed to be protruded , because of its bent carriage . a 
▁ forlorn , jailbird ’s face with a nobby forehead running back into a bald scalp , a 
▁ 156 
▁ crooked nose , and battered - looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce 
▁ and watchful . xxmaj the cheeks were seamed , the mouth had a drawn - in look . xxmaj certainly it was his own face , but it seemed to him that it had changed more than 
▁ he had changed inside . xxmaj the emotions it registered would be different from the 
▁ ones he felt . xxmaj he had gone partially bald . xxmaj for the first moment he had thought 
▁ that he had gone grey as well , but it was only the scalp that was grey . xxmaj except 
▁ for his hands and a circle of his face , his body was grey all over with ancient , 
▁ ingrained dirt . xxmaj here and there under the dirt there were the red scars of wounds , 
▁ and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was an inflamed mass with flakes of skin 
▁ peeling off it . xxmaj but the truly frightening thing was the emaciation of his body . 
▁ xxmaj the barrel of the ribs was as narrow as that of a skeleton : the legs had shrunk 
▁ so that the knees were thicker than the thighs . xxmaj he saw now what o’brien had 
▁ meant about seeing the side view . xxmaj the curvature of the spine was astonishing . 
▁ xxmaj the thin shoulders were hunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest , 
▁ the scraggy neck seemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull . 
▁ xxmaj at a guess he would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty , suffering 
▁ from some malignant disease . 
▁ ’ you have thought sometimes , ’ said o’brien , ’ that my face — the face of a 
▁ member of the xxmaj inner xxmaj party — looks old and worn . xxmaj what do you think of your 
▁ own face ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj he seized xxmaj winston ’s shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him . 
▁ ’ look at the condition you are in ! ’ he said . ’ look at this filthy grime all 
▁ over your body . xxmaj look at the dirt between your toes . xxmaj look at that disgusting 
▁ running sore on your leg . xxmaj do you know that you stink like a goat ? xxmaj probably 
▁ you have ceased to notice it . xxmaj look at your emaciation . xxmaj do you see ? i can 
▁ make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep . i could snap your neck 
▁ like a carrot . xxmaj do you know that you have lost twenty - five kilograms since you 
▁ have been in our hands ? xxmaj even your hair is coming out in handfuls . xxmaj look ! ’ xxmaj he 
▁ plucked at xxmaj winston ’s head and brought away a tuft of hair . ’ open your mouth . 
▁ xxmaj nine , ten , eleven teeth left . xxmaj how many had you when you came to us ? xxmaj and the 
▁ few you have left are dropping out of your head . xxmaj look here ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj he seized one of xxmaj winston ’s remaining front teeth between his powerful thumb 
▁ and forefinger . a twinge of pain shot through xxmaj winston ’s jaw . o’brien had 
▁ wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots . xxmaj he tossed it across the cell . 
▁ ’ you are rotting away , ’ he said ; ’ you are falling to pieces . xxmaj what are you ? a 
▁ bag of filth . xxmaj now turn around and look into that mirror again . xxmaj do you see that 
▁ thing facing you ? xxmaj that is the last man . xxmaj if you are human , that is humanity . 
▁ xxmaj now put your clothes on again . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements . xxmaj until now he had 
▁ not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was . xxmaj only one thought stirred in his 
▁ mind : that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined . xxmaj then 
▁ suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of pity for his 
▁ ruined body overcame him . xxmaj before he knew what he was doing he had collapsed 
▁ on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst into tears . xxmaj he was aware 
▁ of his ugliness , his gracelessness , a bundle of bones in filthy underclothes sitting 
▁ weeping in the harsh white light : but he could not stop himself . o’brien laid a 
▁ hand on his shoulder , almost kindly . 
▁ ’ it will not last for ever , ’ he said . ’ you can escape from it whenever you 
▁ choose . xxmaj everything depends on yourself . ’ 
▁ ’ you did it ! ’ sobbed xxmaj winston . ’ you reduced me to this state . ’ 
▁ 157 
▁ ’ no , xxmaj winston , you reduced yourself to it . xxmaj this is what you accepted when 
▁ you set yourself up against the xxmaj party . xxmaj it was all contained in that first act . 
▁ xxmaj nothing has happened that you did not foresee . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused , and then went on : 
▁ ’ we have beaten you , xxmaj winston . xxmaj we have broken you up . xxmaj you have seen 
▁ what your body is like . xxmaj your mind is in the same state . i do not think there 
▁ can be much pride left in you . xxmaj you have been kicked and flogged and insulted , 
▁ you have screamed with pain , you have rolled on the floor in your own blood 
▁ and vomit . xxmaj you have whimpered for mercy , you have betrayed everybody and 
▁ everything . xxmaj can you think of a single degradation that has not happened to 
▁ you ? ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston had stopped weeping , though the tears were still oozing out of his 
▁ eyes . xxmaj he looked up at o’brien . 
▁ ’ i have not betrayed xxmaj julia , ’ he said . 
▁ o’brien looked down at him thoughtfully . ’ no , ’ he said ; ’ no ; that is perfectly 
▁ true . xxmaj you have not betrayed xxmaj julia . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the peculiar reverence for o’brien , which nothing seemed able to destroy , 
▁ flooded xxmaj winston ’s heart again . xxmaj how intelligent , he thought , how intelligent ! 
▁ xxmaj never did o’brien fail to understand what was said to him . xxmaj anyone else on 
▁ earth would have answered promptly that he had betrayed xxmaj julia . xxmaj for what was 
▁ there that they had not screwed out of him under the torture ? xxmaj he had told 
▁ them everything he knew about her , her habits , her character , her past life ; he 
▁ had confessed in the most trivial detail everything that had happened at their 
▁ meetings , all that he had said to her and she to him , their black - market meals , 
▁ their adulteries , their vague plottings against the xxmaj party — everything . xxmaj and yet , 
▁ in the sense in which he intended the word , he had not betrayed her . xxmaj he had not 
▁ stopped loving her ; his feelings towards her had remained the same . o’brien 
▁ had seen what he meant without the need for explanation . 
▁ ’ tell me , ’ he said , ’ how soon will they shoot me ? ’ 
▁ ’ it might be a long time , ’ said o’brien . ’ you are a difficult case . xxmaj but do n’t 
▁ give up hope . xxmaj everyone is cured sooner or later . xxmaj in the end we shall shoot you . ’ 
▁ 158 
▁ xxmaj chapter 21 
▁ xxmaj he was much better . xxmaj he was growing fatter and stronger every day , if it was 
▁ proper to speak of days . 
▁ xxmaj the white light and the humming sound were the same as ever , but the cell 
▁ was a little more comfortable than the others he had been in . xxmaj there was a 
▁ pillow and a mattress on the plank bed , and a stool to sit on . xxmaj they had given 
▁ him a bath , and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequently in a tin 
▁ basin . xxmaj they even gave him warm water to wash with . xxmaj they had given him new 
▁ underclothes and a clean suit of overalls . xxmaj they had dressed his varicose ulcer 
▁ with soothing ointment . xxmaj they had pulled out the remnants of his teeth and 
▁ given him a new set of dentures . 
▁ xxmaj weeks or months must have passed . xxmaj it would have been possible now to keep 
▁ count of the passage of time , if he had felt any interest in doing so , since he was 
▁ being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals . xxmaj he was getting , he judged , 
▁ three meals in the twenty - four hours ; sometimes he wondered dimly whether 
▁ he was getting them by night or by day . xxmaj the food was surprisingly good , with 
▁ meat at every third meal . xxmaj once there was even a packet of cigarettes . xxmaj he had 
▁ no matches , but the never - speaking guard who brought his food would give him 
▁ a light . xxmaj the first time he tried to smoke it made him sick , but he persevered , 
▁ and spun the packet out for a long time , smoking half a cigarette after each 
▁ meal . 
▁ xxmaj they had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the corner . 
▁ xxmaj at first he made no use of it . xxmaj even when he was awake he was completely 
▁ torpid . xxmaj often he would lie from one meal to the next almost without stirring , 
▁ sometimes asleep , sometimes waking into vague reveries in which it was too 
▁ much trouble to open his eyes . xxmaj he had long grown used to sleeping with a 
▁ strong light on his face . xxmaj it seemed to make no difference , except that one ’s 
▁ dreams were more coherent . xxmaj he dreamed a great deal all through this time , 
▁ and they were always happy dreams . xxmaj he was in the xxmaj golden xxmaj country , or he was 
▁ sitting among enormous glorious , sunlit ruins , with his mother , with xxmaj julia , with 
▁ o’brien — not doing anything , merely sitting in the sun , talking of peaceful 
▁ things . xxmaj such thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his 
▁ dreams . xxmaj he seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort , now that the 
▁ stimulus of pain had been removed . xxmaj he was not bored , he had no desire for 
▁ conversation or distraction . xxmaj merely to be alone , not to be beaten or questioned , 
▁ to have enough to eat , and to be clean all over , was completely satisfying . 
▁ xxmaj by degrees he came to spend less time in sleep , but he still felt no impulse to 
▁ get off the bed . xxmaj all he cared for was to lie quiet and feel the strength gathering in 
▁ 159 
▁ his body . xxmaj he would finger himself here and there , trying to make sure that it was 
▁ not an illusion that his muscles were growing rounder and his skin tauter . xxmaj finally 
▁ it was established beyond a doubt that he was growing fatter ; his thighs were 
▁ now definitely thicker than his knees . xxmaj after that , reluctantly at first , he began 
▁ exercising himself regularly . xxmaj in a little while he could walk three kilometres , 
▁ measured by pacing the cell , and his bowed shoulders were growing straighter . 
▁ xxmaj he attempted more elaborate exercises , and was astonished and humiliated to 
▁ find what things he could not do . xxmaj he could not move out of a walk , he could 
▁ not hold his stool out at arm ’s length , he could not stand on one leg without 
▁ falling over . xxmaj he squatted down on his heels , and found that with agonizing 
▁ pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself to a standing position . xxmaj he lay 
▁ flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight by his hands . xxmaj it was hopeless , he 
▁ could not raise himself a centimetre . xxmaj but after a few more days — a few more 
▁ mealtimes — even that feat was accomplished . a time came when he could 
▁ do it six times running . xxmaj he began to grow actually proud of his body , and to 
▁ cherish an intermittent belief that his face also was growing back to normal . 
▁ xxmaj only when he chanced to put his hand on his bald scalp did he remember the 
▁ seamed , ruined face that had looked back at him out of the mirror . 
▁ xxmaj his mind grew more active . xxmaj he sat down on the plank bed , his back against 
▁ the wall and the slate on his knees , and set to work deliberately at the task of 
▁ re - educating himself . 
▁ xxmaj he had capitulated , that was agreed . xxmaj in reality , as he saw now , he had been 
▁ ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision . xxmaj from the moment 
▁ when he was inside the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love — and yes , even during those minutes 
▁ when he and xxmaj julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the telescreen told 
▁ them what to do — he had grasped the frivolity , the shallowness of his attempt 
▁ to set himself up against the power of the xxmaj party . xxmaj he knew now that for seven 
▁ years the xxmaj thought police had watched him like a beetle under a magnifying 
▁ glass . xxmaj there was no physical act , no word spoken aloud , that they had not 
▁ noticed , no train of thought that they had not been able to infer . xxmaj even the 
▁ speck of whitish dust on the cover of his diary they had carefully replaced . 
▁ xxmaj they had played sound - tracks to him , shown him photographs . xxmaj some of them 
▁ were photographs of xxmaj julia and himself . xxmaj yes , even … xxmaj he could not fight against 
▁ the xxmaj party any longer . xxmaj besides , the xxmaj party was in the right . xxmaj it must be so ; how 
▁ could the immortal , collective brain be mistaken ? xxmaj by what external standard 
▁ could you check its judgements ? xxmaj sanity was statistical . xxmaj it was merely a question 
▁ of learning to think as they thought . xxmaj only ! 
▁ xxmaj the pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers . xxmaj he began to write down 
▁ the thoughts that came into his head . xxmaj he wrote first in large clumsy capitals : 
▁ xxup freedom xxup is xxup slavery 
▁ xxmaj then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it : 
▁ xxup two xxup and xxup two xxup make xxup five 
▁ xxmaj but then there came a sort of check . xxmaj his mind , as though shying away from 
▁ something , seemed unable to concentrate . xxmaj he knew that he knew what came 
▁ next , but for the moment he could not recall it . xxmaj when he did recall it , it was 
▁ only by consciously reasoning out what it must be : it did not come of its own 
▁ accord . xxmaj he wrote : 
▁ xxup god xxup is xxup power 
▁ xxmaj he accepted everything . xxmaj the past was alterable . xxmaj the past never had been 
▁ altered . xxmaj oceania was at war with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj oceania had always been at war 
▁ 160 
▁ with xxmaj eastasia . xxmaj jones , xxmaj aaronson , and xxmaj rutherford were guilty of the crimes they 
▁ were charged with . xxmaj he had never seen the photograph that disproved their guilt . 
▁ xxmaj it had never existed , he had invented it . xxmaj he remembered remembering contrary 
▁ things , but those were false memories , products of self - deception . xxmaj how easy it 
▁ all was ! xxmaj only surrender , and everything else followed . xxmaj it was like swimming 
▁ against a current that swept you backwards however hard you struggled , and 
▁ then suddenly deciding to turn round and go with the current instead of opposing it . xxmaj nothing had changed except your own attitude : the predestined thing 
▁ happened in any case . xxmaj he hardly knew why he had ever rebelled . xxmaj everything 
▁ was easy , except ! 
▁ xxmaj anything could be true . xxmaj the so - called laws of xxmaj nature were nonsense . xxmaj the 
▁ law of gravity was nonsense . ’ if i wished , ’ o’brien had said , ’ i could float off 
▁ this floor like a soap bubble . ’ xxmaj winston worked it out . ’ if he thinks he floats off 
▁ the floor , and if i simultaneously think i see him do it , then the thing happens . ’ 
▁ xxmaj suddenly , like a lump of submerged wreckage breaking the surface of water , 
▁ the thought burst into his mind : ’ it does n’t really happen . xxmaj we imagine it . 
▁ xxmaj it is hallucination . ’ xxmaj he pushed the thought under instantly . xxmaj the fallacy was 
▁ obvious . xxmaj it presupposed that somewhere or other , outside oneself , there was 
▁ a ’ real ’ world where ’ real ’ things happened . xxmaj but how could there be such a 
▁ world ? xxmaj what knowledge have we of anything , save through our own minds ? xxmaj all 
▁ happenings are in the mind . xxmaj whatever happens in all minds , truly happens . 
▁ xxmaj he had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy , and he was in no danger of 
▁ succumbing to it . xxmaj he realized , nevertheless , that it ought never to have occurred 
▁ to him . xxmaj the mind should develop a blind spot whenever a dangerous thought 
▁ presented itself . xxmaj the process should be automatic , instinctive . xxmaj crimestop , they 
▁ called it in xxmaj newspeak . 
▁ xxmaj he set to work to exercise himself in crimestop . xxmaj he presented himself with 
▁ propositions — ’ the xxmaj party says the earth is flat ’ , ’ the party says that ice is 
▁ heavier than water ’ — and trained himself in not seeing or not understanding 
▁ the arguments that contradicted them . xxmaj it was not easy . xxmaj it needed great powers 
▁ of reasoning and improvisation . xxmaj the arithmetical problems raised , for instance , 
▁ by such a statement as ’ two and two make five ’ were beyond his intellectual 
▁ grasp . xxmaj it needed also a sort of athleticism of mind , an ability at one moment 
▁ to make the most delicate use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the 
▁ crudest logical errors . xxmaj stupidity was as necessary as intelligence , and as difficult 
▁ to attain . 
▁ xxmaj all the while , with one part of his mind , he wondered how soon they would 
▁ shoot him . ’ everything depends on yourself , ’ o’brien had said ; but he knew 
▁ that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer . xxmaj it might 
▁ be ten minutes hence , or ten years . xxmaj they might keep him for years in solitary 
▁ confinement , they might send him to a labour - camp , they might release him for 
▁ a while , as they sometimes did . xxmaj it was perfectly possible that before he was shot 
▁ the whole drama of his arrest and interrogation would be enacted all over again . 
▁ xxmaj the one certain thing was that death never came at an expected moment . xxmaj the 
▁ tradition — the unspoken tradition : somehow you knew it , though you never 
▁ heard it said - was that they shot you from behind ; always in the back of the 
▁ head , without warning , as you walked down a corridor from cell to cell . 
▁ xxmaj one day — but ’ one day ’ was not the right expression ; just as probably it 
▁ was in the middle of the night : once — he fell into a strange , blissful reverie . 
▁ xxmaj he was walking down the corridor , waiting for the bullet . xxmaj he knew that it was 
▁ 161 
▁ coming in another moment . xxmaj everything was settled , smoothed out , reconciled . 
▁ xxmaj there were no more doubts , no more arguments , no more pain , no more fear . 
▁ xxmaj his body was healthy and strong . xxmaj he walked easily , with a joy of movement 
▁ and with a feeling of walking in sunlight . xxmaj he was not any longer in the narrow 
▁ white corridors in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , he was in the enormous sunlit passage , 
▁ a kilometre wide , down which he had seemed to walk in the delirium induced 
▁ by drugs . xxmaj he was in the xxmaj golden xxmaj country , following the foot - track across the 
▁ old rabbit - cropped pasture . xxmaj he could feel the short springy turf under his feet 
▁ and the gentle sunshine on his face . xxmaj at the edge of the field were the elm trees , 
▁ faintly stirring , and somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay 
▁ in the green pools under the willows . 
▁ xxmaj suddenly he started up with a shock of horror . xxmaj the sweat broke out on his 
▁ backbone . xxmaj he had heard himself cry aloud : 
▁ ’ julia ! xxmaj julia ! xxmaj julia , my love ! xxmaj julia ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj for a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence . 
▁ xxmaj she had seemed to be not merely with him , but inside him . xxmaj it was as though 
▁ she had got into the texture of his skin . xxmaj in that moment he had loved her far 
▁ more than he had ever done when they were together and free . xxmaj also he knew 
▁ that somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help . 
▁ xxmaj he lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself . xxmaj what had he done ? 
▁ xxmaj how many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness ? 
▁ xxmaj in another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside . xxmaj they could 
▁ not let such an outburst go unpunished . xxmaj they would know now , if they had not 
▁ known before , that he was breaking the agreement he had made with them . xxmaj he 
▁ obeyed the xxmaj party , but he still hated the xxmaj party . xxmaj in the old days he had hidden 
▁ a heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity . xxmaj now he had retreated 
▁ a step further : in the mind he had surrendered , but he had hoped to keep the 
▁ inner heart inviolate . xxmaj he knew that he was in the wrong , but he preferred to 
▁ be in the wrong . xxmaj they would understand that- o’brien would understand it . 
▁ xxmaj it was all confessed in that single foolish cry . 
▁ xxmaj he would have to start all over again . xxmaj it might take years . xxmaj he ran a hand 
▁ over his face , trying to familiarize himself with the new shape . xxmaj there were deep 
▁ furrows in the cheeks , the cheekbones felt sharp , the nose flattened . xxmaj besides , 
▁ since last seeing himself in the glass he had been given a complete new set of 
▁ teeth . xxmaj it was not easy to preserve inscrutability when you did not know what 
▁ your face looked like . xxmaj in any case , mere control of the features was not enough . 
▁ xxmaj for the first time he perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also 
▁ hide it from yourself . xxmaj you must know all the while that it is there , but until 
▁ it is needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape 
▁ that could be given a name . xxmaj from now onwards he must not only think right ; 
▁ he must feel right , dream right . xxmaj and all the while he must keep his hatred 
▁ locked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself and yet 
▁ unconnected with the rest of him , a kind of cyst . 
▁ xxmaj one day they would decide to shoot him . xxmaj you could not tell when it would 
▁ happen , but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess . xxmaj it was 
▁ always from behind , walking down a corridor . xxmaj ten seconds would be enough . 
▁ xxmaj in that time the world inside him could turn over . xxmaj and then suddenly , without 
▁ a word uttered , without a check in his step , without the changing of a line in 
▁ his face — suddenly the camouflage would be down and bang ! would go the 
▁ batteries of his hatred . xxmaj hatred would fill him like an enormous roaring flame . 
▁ 162 
▁ xxmaj and almost in the same instant bang ! would go the bullet , too late , or too early . 
▁ xxmaj they would have blown his brain to pieces before they could reclaim it . xxmaj the 
▁ heretical thought would be unpunished , unrepented , out of their reach for ever . 
▁ xxmaj they would have blown a hole in their own perfection . xxmaj to die hating them , that 
▁ was freedom . 
▁ xxmaj he shut his eyes . xxmaj it was more difficult than accepting an intellectual discipline . xxmaj it was a question of degrading himself , mutilating himself . xxmaj he had got 
▁ to plunge into the filthiest of filth . xxmaj what was the most horrible , sickening thing 
▁ of all ? xxmaj he thought of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj the enormous face ( because of constantly 
▁ seeing it on posters he always thought of it as being a metre wide ) , with its 
▁ heavy black moustache and the eyes that followed you to and fro , seemed to 
▁ float into his mind of its own accord . xxmaj what were his true feelings towards xxmaj big 
▁ xxmaj brother ? 
▁ xxmaj there was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage . xxmaj the steel door swung open 
▁ with a clang . o’brien walked into the cell . xxmaj behind him were the waxen - faced 
▁ officer and the black - uniformed guards . 
▁ ’ get up , ’ said o’brien . ’ come here . ’ 
▁ xxmaj winston stood opposite him . o’brien took xxmaj winston ’s shoulders between his 
▁ strong hands and looked at him closely . 
▁ ’ you have had thoughts of deceiving me , ’ he said . ’ that was stupid . xxmaj stand 
▁ up straighter . xxmaj look me in the face . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he paused , and went on in a gentler tone : 
▁ ’ you are improving . xxmaj intellectually there is very little wrong with you . xxmaj it is 
▁ only emotionally that you have failed to make progress . xxmaj tell me , xxmaj winston — 
▁ and remember , no lies : you know that i am always able to detect a lie — tell 
▁ me , what are your true feelings towards xxmaj big xxmaj brother ? ’ 
▁ ’ i hate him . ’ 
▁ ’ you hate him . xxmaj good . xxmaj then the time has come for you to take the last step . 
▁ xxmaj you must love xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj it is not enough to obey him : you must love him . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he released xxmaj winston with a little push towards the guards . 
▁ ’ room 101 , ’ he said . 
▁ 163 
▁ xxmaj chapter 22 
▁ xxmaj at each stage of his imprisonment he had known , or seemed to know , whereabouts he was in the windowless building . xxmaj possibly there were slight differences 
▁ in the air pressure . xxmaj the cells where the guards had beaten him were below 
▁ ground level . xxmaj the room where he had been interrogated by o’brien was high 
▁ up near the roof . xxmaj this place was many metres underground , as deep down as it 
▁ was possible to go . 
▁ xxmaj it was bigger than most of the cells he had been in . xxmaj but he hardly noticed 
▁ his surroundings . xxmaj all he noticed was that there were two small tables straight 
▁ in front of him , each covered with green baize . xxmaj one was only a metre or two 
▁ from him , the other was further away , near the door . xxmaj he was strapped upright 
▁ in a chair , so tightly that he could move nothing , not even his head . a sort of 
▁ pad gripped his head from behind , forcing him to look straight in front of him . 
▁ xxmaj for a moment he was alone , then the door opened and o’brien came in . 
▁ ’ you asked me once , ’ said o’brien , ’ what was in xxmaj room 101 . i told you that 
▁ you knew the answer already . xxmaj everyone knows it . xxmaj the thing that is in xxmaj room 
▁ 101 is the worst thing in the world . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the door opened again . a guard came in , carrying something made of wire , 
▁ a box or basket of some kind . xxmaj he set it down on the further table . xxmaj because of 
▁ the position in which o’brien was standing . xxmaj winston could not see what the 
▁ thing was . 
▁ ’ the worst thing in the world , ’ said o’brien , ’ varies from individual to individual . xxmaj it may be burial alive , or death by fire , or by drowning , or by impalement , or fifty other deaths . xxmaj there are cases where it is some quite trivial thing , 
▁ not even fatal . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he had moved a little to one side , so that xxmaj winston had a better view of the 
▁ thing on the table . xxmaj it was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top for carrying 
▁ it by . xxmaj fixed to the front of it was something that looked like a fencing mask , 
▁ with the concave side outwards . xxmaj although it was three or four metres away from 
▁ him , he could see that the cage was divided lengthways into two compartments , 
▁ and that there was some kind of creature in each . xxmaj they were rats . 
▁ ’ in your case , said o’brien , ’ the worst thing in the world happens to be rats . ’ 
▁ a sort of premonitory tremor , a fear of he was not certain what , had passed 
▁ through xxmaj winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage . xxmaj but at this 
▁ moment the meaning of the mask - like attachment in front of it suddenly sank 
▁ into him . xxmaj his bowels seemed to turn to water . 
▁ ’ you ca n’t do that ! ’ he cried out in a high cracked voice . ’ you could n’t , you 
▁ could n’t ! xxmaj it ’s impossible . ’ 
▁ 164 
▁ ’ do you remember , ’ said o’brien , ’ the moment of panic that used to occur 
▁ in your dreams ? xxmaj there was a wall of blackness in front of you , and a roaring 
▁ sound in your ears . xxmaj there was something terrible on the other side of the wall . 
▁ xxmaj you knew that you knew what it was , but you dared not drag it into the open . 
▁ xxmaj it was the rats that were on the other side of the wall . ’ 
▁ ’ o’brien ! ’ said xxmaj winston , making an effort to control his voice . ’ you know 
▁ this is not necessary . xxmaj what is it that you want me to do ? ’ 
▁ o’brien made no direct answer . xxmaj when he spoke it was in the schoolmasterish 
▁ manner that he sometimes affected . xxmaj he looked thoughtfully into the distance , 
▁ as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind xxmaj winston ’s back . 
▁ ’ by itself , ’ he said , ’ pain is not always enough . xxmaj there are occasions when a 
▁ human being will stand out against pain , even to the point of death . xxmaj but for 
▁ everyone there is something unendurable — something that can not be contemplated . xxmaj courage and cowardice are not involved . xxmaj if you are falling from a height 
▁ it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope . xxmaj if you have come up from deep water it is 
▁ not cowardly to fill your lungs with air . xxmaj it is merely an instinct which can not be 
▁ destroyed . xxmaj it is the same with the rats . xxmaj for you , they are unendurable . xxmaj they 
▁ are a form of pressure that you can not withstand . even if you wished to . xxmaj you 
▁ will do what is required of you . 
▁ ’ but what is it , what is it ? xxmaj how can i do it if i do n’t know what it is ? ’ 
▁ o’brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table . xxmaj he set 
▁ it down carefully on the baize cloth . xxmaj winston could hear the blood singing in 
▁ his ears . xxmaj he had the feeling of sitting in utter loneliness . xxmaj he was in the middle 
▁ of a great empty plain , a flat desert drenched with sunlight , across which all 
▁ sounds came to him out of immense distances . xxmaj yet the cage with the rats was 
▁ not two metres away from him . xxmaj they were enormous rats . xxmaj they were at the age 
▁ when a rat ’s muzzle grows blunt and fierce and his fur brown instead of grey . 
▁ ’ the rat , ’ said o’brien , still addressing his invisible audience , ’ although a 
▁ rodent , is carnivorous . xxmaj you are aware of that . xxmaj you will have heard of the things 
▁ that happen in the poor quarters of this town . xxmaj in some streets a woman dare 
▁ not leave her baby alone in the house , even for five minutes . xxmaj the rats are certain 
▁ to attack it . xxmaj within quite a small time they will strip it to the bones . xxmaj they 
▁ also attack sick or dying people . xxmaj they show astonishing intelligence in knowing 
▁ when a human being is helpless . ’ 
▁ xxmaj there was an outburst of squeals from the cage . xxmaj it seemed to reach xxmaj winston 
▁ from far away . xxmaj the rats were fighting ; they were trying to get at each other 
▁ through the partition . xxmaj he heard also a deep groan of despair . xxmaj that , too , seemed 
▁ to come from outside himself . 
▁ o’brien picked up the cage , and , as he did so , pressed something in it . xxmaj there 
▁ was a sharp click . xxmaj winston made a frantic effort to tear himself loose from the 
▁ chair . xxmaj it was hopeless ; every part of him , even his head , was held immovably . 
▁ o’brien moved the cage nearer . xxmaj it was less than a metre from xxmaj winston ’s face . 
▁ ’ i have pressed the first lever , ’ said o’brien . ’ you understand the construction of this cage . xxmaj the mask will fit over your head , leaving no exit . xxmaj when i press 
▁ this other lever , the door of the cage will slide up . xxmaj these starving brutes will 
▁ shoot out of it like bullets . xxmaj have you ever seen a rat leap through the air ? xxmaj they 
▁ will leap on to your face and bore straight into it . xxmaj sometimes they attack the 
▁ eyes first . xxmaj sometimes they burrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue . ’ 
▁ xxmaj the cage was nearer ; it was closing in . xxmaj winston heard a succession of shrill 
▁ cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head . xxmaj but he fought 
▁ 165 
▁ furiously against his panic . xxmaj to think , to think , even with a split second left — 
▁ to think was the only hope . xxmaj suddenly the foul musty odour of the brutes struck 
▁ his nostrils . xxmaj there was a violent convulsion of nausea inside him , and he almost 
▁ lost consciousness . xxmaj everything had gone black . xxmaj for an instant he was insane , a 
▁ screaming animal . xxmaj yet he came out of the blackness clutching an idea . xxmaj there 
▁ was one and only one way to save himself . xxmaj he must interpose another human 
▁ being , the body of another human being , between himself and the rats . 
▁ xxmaj the circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of anything else . xxmaj the wire door was a couple of hand - spans from his face . xxmaj the rats 
▁ knew what was coming now . xxmaj one of them was leaping up and down , the other , 
▁ an old scaly grandfather of the sewers , stood up , with his pink hands against 
▁ the bars , and fiercely sniffed the air . xxmaj winston could see the whiskers and the 
▁ yellow teeth . xxmaj again the black panic took hold of him . xxmaj he was blind , helpless , 
▁ mindless . 
▁ ’ it was a common punishment in xxmaj imperial xxmaj china , ’ said o’brien as didactically as ever . 
▁ xxmaj the mask was closing on his face . xxmaj the wire brushed his cheek . xxmaj and then 
▁ — no , it was not relief , only hope , a tiny fragment of hope . xxmaj too late , perhaps 
▁ too late . xxmaj but he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there was 
▁ just one person to whom he could transfer his punishment — one body that 
▁ he could thrust between himself and the rats . xxmaj and he was shouting frantically , 
▁ over and over . 
▁ ’ do it to xxmaj julia ! xxmaj do it to xxmaj julia ! xxmaj not me ! xxmaj julia ! i do n’t care what you do to 
▁ her . xxmaj tear her face off , strip her to the bones . xxmaj not me ! xxmaj julia ! xxmaj not me ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj he was falling backwards , into enormous depths , away from the rats . xxmaj he was 
▁ still strapped in the chair , but he had fallen through the floor , through the walls 
▁ of the building , through the earth , through the oceans , through the atmosphere , 
▁ into outer space , into the gulfs between the stars — always away , away , away 
▁ from the rats . xxmaj he was light years distant , but o’brien was still standing at his 
▁ side . xxmaj there was still the cold touch of wire against his cheek . xxmaj but through the 
▁ darkness that enveloped him he heard another metallic click , and knew that the 
▁ cage door had clicked shut and not open . 
▁ 166 
▁ xxmaj chapter 23 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree was almost empty . a ray of sunlight slanting through a 
▁ window fell on dusty table - tops . xxmaj it was the lonely hour of fifteen . a tinny music 
▁ trickled from the telescreens . 
▁ xxmaj winston sat in his usual corner , gazing into an empty glass . xxmaj now and again 
▁ he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall . xxup big 
▁ xxup brother xxup is xxup watching xxup you , the caption said . xxmaj unbidden , a waiter came 
▁ and filled his glass up with xxmaj victory xxmaj gin , shaking into it a few drops from another 
▁ bottle with a quill through the cork . xxmaj it was saccharine flavoured with cloves , 
▁ the speciality of the caf´e . 
▁ xxmaj winston was listening to the telescreen . xxmaj at present only music was coming 
▁ out of it , but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be a 
▁ special bulletin from the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj peace . xxmaj the news from the xxmaj african front 
▁ was disquieting in the extreme . xxmaj on and off he had been worrying about it all day . 
▁ a xxmaj eurasian army ( oceania was at war with xxmaj eurasia : xxmaj oceania had always been 
▁ at war with xxmaj eurasia ) was moving southward at terrifying speed . xxmaj the mid - day 
▁ bulletin had not mentioned any definite area , but it was probable that already 
▁ the mouth of the xxmaj congo was a battlefield . xxmaj brazzaville and xxmaj leopoldville were in 
▁ danger . xxmaj one did not have to look at the map to see what it meant . xxmaj it was not 
▁ merely a question of losing xxmaj central xxmaj africa : for the first time in the whole war , 
▁ the territory of xxmaj oceania itself was menaced . 
▁ a violent emotion , not fear exactly but a sort of undifferentiated excitement , 
▁ flared up in him , then faded again . xxmaj he stopped thinking about the war . xxmaj in 
▁ these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for more than a few 
▁ moments at a time . xxmaj he picked up his glass and drained it at a gulp . xxmaj as always , 
▁ the gin made him shudder and even retch slightly . xxmaj the stuff was horrible . xxmaj the 
▁ cloves and saccharine , themselves disgusting enough in their sickly way , could 
▁ not disguise the flat oily smell ; and what was worst of all was that the smell of 
▁ gin , which dwelt with him night and day , was inextricably mixed up in his mind 
▁ with the smell of thosehe never named them , even in his thoughts , and so far as it was possible he 
▁ never visualized them . xxmaj they were something that he was half - aware of , hovering 
▁ close to his face , a smell that clung to his nostrils . xxmaj as the gin rose in him he 
▁ belched through purple lips . xxmaj he had grown fatter since they released him , and 
▁ had regained his old colour — indeed , more than regained it . xxmaj his features had 
▁ thickened , the skin on nose and cheekbones was coarsely red , even the bald scalp 
▁ was too deep a pink . a waiter , again unbidden , brought the chessboard and the 
▁ current issue of xxmaj the xxmaj times , with the page turned down at the chess problem . 
▁ 167 
▁ xxmaj then , seeing that xxmaj winston ’s glass was empty , he brought the gin bottle and filled 
▁ it . xxmaj there was no need to give orders . xxmaj they knew his habits . xxmaj the chessboard 
▁ was always waiting for him , his corner table was always reserved ; even when 
▁ the place was full he had it to himself , since nobody cared to be seen sitting too 
▁ close to him . xxmaj he never even bothered to count his drinks . xxmaj at irregular intervals 
▁ they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they said was the bill , but 
▁ he had the impression that they always undercharged him . xxmaj it would have made 
▁ no difference if it had been the other way about . xxmaj he had always plenty of money 
▁ nowadays . xxmaj he even had a job , a sinecure , more highly - paid than his old job had 
▁ been . 
▁ xxmaj the music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over . xxmaj winston 
▁ raised his head to listen . xxmaj no bulletins from the front , however . xxmaj it was merely 
▁ a brief announcement from the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj plenty . xxmaj in the preceding quarter , it 
▁ appeared , the xxmaj tenth three - year xxmaj plan ’s quota for bootlaces had been overfulfilled 
▁ by 98 per cent . 
▁ xxmaj he examined the chess problem and set out the pieces . xxmaj it was a tricky ending , 
▁ involving a couple of knights . ’ white to play and mate in two moves . ’ xxmaj winston 
▁ looked up at the portrait of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj white always mates , he thought with 
▁ a sort of cloudy mysticism . xxmaj always , without exception , it is so arranged . xxmaj in no 
▁ chess problem since the beginning of the world has black ever won . xxmaj did it not 
▁ symbolize the eternal , unvarying triumph of xxmaj good over xxmaj evil ? xxmaj the huge face 
▁ gazed back at him , full of calm power . xxmaj white always mates . 
▁ xxmaj the voice from the telescreen paused and added in a different and much 
▁ graver tone : ’ you are warned to stand by for an important announcement at 
▁ fifteen - thirty . xxmaj fifteen - thirty ! xxmaj this is news of the highest importance . xxmaj take care 
▁ not to miss it . xxmaj fifteen - thirty ! ’ xxmaj the tinking music struck up again . 
▁ xxmaj winston ’s heart stirred . xxmaj that was the bulletin from the front ; instinct told 
▁ him that it was bad news that was coming . xxmaj all day , with little spurts of excitement , the thought of a smashing defeat in xxmaj africa had been in and out of his 
▁ mind . xxmaj he seemed actually to see the xxmaj eurasian army swarming across the neverbroken frontier and pouring down into the tip of xxmaj africa like a column of ants . 
▁ xxmaj why had it not been possible to outflank them in some way ? xxmaj the outline of the 
▁ xxmaj west xxmaj african coast stood out vividly in his mind . xxmaj he picked up the white knight 
▁ and moved it across the board . xxmaj there was the proper spot . xxmaj even while he saw 
▁ the black horde racing southward he saw another force , mysteriously assembled , 
▁ suddenly planted in their rear , cutting their comunications by land and sea . xxmaj he 
▁ felt that by willing it he was bringing that other force into existence . xxmaj but it 
▁ was necessary to act quickly . xxmaj if they could get control of the whole of xxmaj africa , 
▁ if they had airfields and submarine bases at the xxmaj cape , it would cut xxmaj oceania in 
▁ two . xxmaj it might mean anything : defeat , breakdown , the redivision of the world , 
▁ the destruction of the xxmaj party ! xxmaj he drew a deep breath . xxmaj an extraordinary medley 
▁ of feeling - but it was not a medley , exactly ; rather it was successive layers of 
▁ feeling , in which one could not say which layer was undermost struggled inside 
▁ him . 
▁ xxmaj the spasm passed . xxmaj he put the white knight back in its place , but for the 
▁ moment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problem . xxmaj his 
▁ thoughts wandered again . xxmaj almost unconsciously he traced with his finger in the 
▁ dust on the table : 2 + 2= 
▁ ’ they ca n’t get inside you , ’ she had said . xxmaj but they could get inside you . 
▁ ’ what happens to you here is for ever , ’ o’brien had said . xxmaj that was a true 
▁ 168 
▁ word . xxmaj there were things , your own acts , from which you could never recover . 
▁ xxmaj something was killed in your breast : burnt out , cauterized out . 
▁ xxmaj he had seen her ; he had even spoken to her . xxmaj there was no danger in it . 
▁ xxmaj he knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in his 
▁ doings . xxmaj he could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them had 
▁ wanted to . xxmaj actually it was by chance that they had met . xxmaj it was in the xxmaj park , 
▁ on a vile , biting day in xxmaj march , when the earth was like iron and all the grass 
▁ seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few crocuses which 
▁ had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind . xxmaj he was hurrying 
▁ along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not ten metres away 
▁ from him . xxmaj it struck him at once that she had changed in some ill - defined way . 
▁ xxmaj they almost passed one another without a sign , then he turned and followed 
▁ her , not very eagerly . xxmaj he knew that there was no danger , nobody would take 
▁ any interest in him . xxmaj she did not speak . xxmaj she walked obliquely away across the 
▁ grass as though trying to get rid of him , then seemed to resign herself to having 
▁ him at her side . xxmaj presently they were in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs , 
▁ useless either for concealment or as protection from the wind . xxmaj they halted . xxmaj it 
▁ was vilely cold . xxmaj the wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasional , 
▁ dirty - looking crocuses . xxmaj he put his arm round her waist . 
▁ xxmaj there was no telescreen , but there must be hidden microphones : besides , 
▁ they could be seen . xxmaj it did not matter , nothing mattered . xxmaj they could have lain 
▁ down on the ground and done that if they had wanted to . xxmaj his flesh froze with 
▁ horror at the thought of it . xxmaj she made no response whatever to the clasp of 
▁ his arm ; she did not even try to disengage herself . xxmaj he knew now what had 
▁ changed in her . xxmaj her face was sallower , and there was a long scar , partly hidden 
▁ by the hair , across her forehead and temple ; but that was not the change . xxmaj it 
▁ was that her waist had grown thicker , and , in a surprising way , had stiffened . 
▁ xxmaj he remembered how once , after the explosion of a rocket bomb , he had helped 
▁ to drag a corpse out of some ruins , and had been astonished not only by the 
▁ incredible weight of the thing , but by its rigidity and awkwardness to handle , 
▁ which made it seem more like stone than flesh . xxmaj her body felt like that . xxmaj it 
▁ occurred to him that the texture of her skin would be quite different from what 
▁ it had once been . 
▁ xxmaj he did not attempt to kiss her , nor did they speak . xxmaj as they walked back 
▁ across the grass , she looked directly at him for the first time . xxmaj it was only a 
▁ momentary glance , full of contempt and dislike . xxmaj he wondered whether it was a 
▁ dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it was inspired also by his 
▁ bloated face and the water that the wind kept squeezing from his eyes . xxmaj they 
▁ sat down on two iron chairs , side by side but not too close together . xxmaj he saw 
▁ that she was about to speak . xxmaj she moved her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and 
▁ deliberately crushed a twig . xxmaj her feet seemed to have grown broader , he noticed . 
▁ ’ i betrayed you , ’ she said baldly . 
▁ ’ i betrayed you , ’ he said . 
▁ xxmaj she gave him another quick look of dislike . 
▁ ’ sometimes , ’ she said , ’ they threaten you with something something you 
▁ ca n’t stand up to , ca n’t even think about . xxmaj and then you say , ” do n’t do it to 
▁ me , do it to somebody else , do it to xxmaj so - and - so . ” xxmaj and perhaps you might pretend , 
▁ afterwards , that it was only a trick and that you just said it to make them stop 
▁ and did n’t really mean it . xxmaj but that is n’t true . xxmaj at the time when it happens you 
▁ do mean it . xxmaj you think there ’s no other way of saving yourself , and you ’re quite 
▁ 169 
▁ ready to save yourself that way . xxmaj you want it to happen to the other person . 
▁ xxmaj you do n’t give a damn what they suffer . xxmaj all you care about is yourself . ’ 
▁ ’ all you care about is yourself , ’ he echoed . 
▁ ’ and after that , you do n’t feel the same towards the other person any longer . ’ 
▁ ’ no , ’ he said , ’ you do n’t feel the same . ’ 
▁ xxmaj there did not seem to be anything more to say . xxmaj the wind plastered their 
▁ thin overalls against their bodies . xxmaj almost at once it became embarrassing to sit 
▁ there in silence : besides , it was too cold to keep still . xxmaj she said something about 
▁ catching her xxmaj tube and stood up to go . 
▁ ’ we must meet again , ’ he said . 
▁ ’ yes , ’ she said , ’ we must meet again . ’ 
▁ xxmaj he followed irresolutely for a little distance , half a pace behind her . xxmaj they 
▁ did not speak again . xxmaj she did not actually try to shake him off , but walked at 
▁ just such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of her . xxmaj he had made up his 
▁ mind that he would accompany her as far as the xxmaj tube station , but suddenly 
▁ this process of trailing along in the cold seemed pointless and unbearable . xxmaj he 
▁ was overwhelmed by a desire not so much to get away from xxmaj julia as to get back 
▁ to the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree xxmaj caf´e , which had never seemed so attractive as at this 
▁ moment . xxmaj he had a nostalgic vision of his corner table , with the newspaper and 
▁ the chessboard and the ever - flowing gin . xxmaj above all , it would be warm in there . 
▁ xxmaj the next moment , not altogether by accident , he allowed himself to become 
▁ separated from her by a small knot of people . xxmaj he made a halfhearted attempt 
▁ to catch up , then slowed down , turned , and made off in the opposite direction . 
▁ xxmaj when he had gone fifty metres he looked back . xxmaj the street was not crowded , 
▁ but already he could not distinguish her . xxmaj any one of a dozen hurrying figures 
▁ might have been hers . xxmaj perhaps her thickened , stiffened body was no longer 
▁ recognizable from behind . 
▁ ’ at the time when it happens , ’ she had said , ’ you do mean it . ’ xxmaj he had meant 
▁ it . xxmaj he had not merely said it , he had wished it . xxmaj he had wished that she and 
▁ not he should be delivered over to thesomething changed in the music that trickled from the telescreen . a cracked 
▁ and jeering note , a yellow note , came into it . xxmaj and then — perhaps it was not 
▁ happening , perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance of sound — 
▁ a voice was singing : 
▁ ’ under the spreading chestnut tree 
▁ i sold you and you sold me ’ 
▁ xxmaj the tears welled up in his eyes . a passing waiter noticed that his glass was 
▁ empty and came back with the gin bottle . 
▁ xxmaj he took up his glass and sniffed at it . xxmaj the stuff grew not less but more 
▁ horrible with every mouthful he drank . xxmaj but it had become the element he 
▁ swam in . xxmaj it was his life , his death , and his resurrection . xxmaj it was gin that sank 
▁ him into stupor every night , and gin that revived him every morning . xxmaj when he 
▁ woke , seldom before eleven hundred , with gummed - up eyelids and fiery mouth 
▁ and a back that seemed to be broken , it would have been impossible even to 
▁ rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the bottle and teacup placed 
▁ beside the bed overnight . xxmaj through the midday hours he sat with glazed face , 
▁ the bottle handy , listening to the telescreen . xxmaj from fifteen to closing - time he 
▁ was a fixture in the xxmaj chestnut xxmaj tree . xxmaj no one cared what he did any longer , no 
▁ whistle woke him , no telescreen admonished him . xxmaj occasionally , perhaps twice a 
▁ week , he went to a dusty , forgotten - looking office in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth and 
▁ 170 
▁ did a little work , or what was called work . xxmaj he had been appointed to a subcommittee of a sub - committee which had sprouted from one of the innumerable 
▁ committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the compilation of the 
▁ xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition of the xxmaj newspeak xxmaj dictionary . xxmaj they were engaged in producing 
▁ something called an xxmaj interim xxmaj report , but what it was that they were reporting on 
▁ he had never definitely found out . xxmaj it was something to do with the question of 
▁ whether commas should be placed inside brackets , or outside . xxmaj there were four 
▁ others on the committee , all of them persons similar to himself . xxmaj there were days 
▁ when they assembled and then promptly dispersed again , frankly admitting to 
▁ one another that there was not really anything to be done . xxmaj but there were other 
▁ days when they settled down to their work almost eagerly , making a tremendous 
▁ show of entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were 
▁ never finished — when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing 
▁ about grew extraordinarily involved and abstruse , with subtle haggling over 
▁ definitions , enormous digressions , quarrels threats , even , to appeal to higher 
▁ authority . xxmaj and then suddenly the life would go out of them and they would sit 
▁ round the table looking at one another with extinct eyes , like ghosts fading at 
▁ cock - crow . 
▁ xxmaj the telescreen was silent for a moment . xxmaj winston raised his head again . xxmaj the 
▁ bulletin ! xxmaj but no , they were merely changing the music . xxmaj he had the map of 
▁ xxmaj africa behind his eyelids . xxmaj the movement of the armies was a diagram : a black 
▁ arrow tearing vertically southward , and a white arrow horizontally eastward , 
▁ across the tail of the first . xxmaj as though for reassurance he looked up at the 
▁ imperturbable face in the portrait . xxmaj was it conceivable that the second arrow 
▁ did not even exist ? 
▁ xxmaj his interest flagged again . xxmaj he drank another mouthful of gin , picked up the 
▁ white knight and made a tentative move . xxmaj check . xxmaj but it was evidently not the 
▁ right move , because 
▁ xxmaj uncalled , a memory floated into his mind . xxmaj he saw a candle - lit room with 
▁ a vast white - counterpaned bed , and himself , a boy of nine or ten , sitting on 
▁ the floor , shaking a dice - box , and laughing excitedly . xxmaj his mother was sitting 
▁ opposite him and also laughing . 
▁ xxmaj it must have been about a month before she disappeared . xxmaj it was a moment 
▁ of reconciliation , when the nagging hunger in his belly was forgotten and his 
▁ earlier affection for her had temporarily revived . xxmaj he remembered the day well , 
▁ a pelting , drenching day when the water streamed down the window - pane and 
▁ the light indoors was too dull to read by . xxmaj the boredom of the two children in 
▁ the dark , cramped bedroom became unbearable . xxmaj winston whined and grizzled , 
▁ made futile demands for food , fretted about the room pulling everything out 
▁ of place and kicking the wainscoting until the neighbours banged on the wall , 
▁ while the younger child wailed intermittently . xxmaj in the end his mother said , ’ now 
▁ be good , and i’il buy you a toy . a lovely toy — you ’ll love it ’ ; and then she had 
▁ gone out in the rain , to a little general shop which was still sporadically open 
▁ nearby , and came back with a cardboard box containing an outfit of xxmaj snakes 
▁ and xxmaj ladders . xxmaj he could still remember the smell of the damp cardboard . xxmaj it was 
▁ a miserable outfit . xxmaj the board was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so 
▁ ill - cut that they would hardly lie on their sides . xxmaj winston looked at the thing 
▁ sulkily and without interest . xxmaj but then his mother lit a piece of candle and they 
▁ sat down on the floor to play . xxmaj soon he was wildly excited and shouting with 
▁ laughter as the tiddly - winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and then came 
▁ 171 
▁ slithering down the snakes again , almost to the starting- point . xxmaj they played 
▁ eight games , winning four each . xxmaj his tiny sister , too young to understand what 
▁ the game was about , had sat propped up against a bolster , laughing because the 
▁ others were laughing . xxmaj for a whole afternoon they had all been happy together , 
▁ as in his earlier childhood . 
▁ xxmaj he pushed the picture out of his mind . xxmaj it was a false memory . xxmaj he was 
▁ troubled by false memories occasionally . xxmaj they did not matter so long as one 
▁ knew them for what they were . xxmaj some things had happened , others had not 
▁ happened . xxmaj he turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight 
▁ again . xxmaj almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with a clatter . 
▁ xxmaj he had started as though a pin had run into him . 
▁ a shrill trumpet - call had pierced the air . xxmaj it was the bulletin ! xxmaj victory ! xxmaj it 
▁ always meant victory when a trumpet- call preceded the news . a sort of electric 
▁ drill ran through the caf´e . xxmaj even the waiters had started and pricked up their 
▁ ears . 
▁ xxmaj the trumpet - call had let loose an enormous volume of noise . xxmaj already an 
▁ excited voice was gabbling from the telescreen , but even as it started it was 
▁ almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside . xxmaj the news had run round 
▁ the streets like magic . xxmaj he could hear just enough of what was issuing from the 
▁ telescreen to realize that it had all happened , as he had foreseen ; a vast seaborne 
▁ armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow in the enemy ’s rear , the white 
▁ arrow tearing across the tail of the black . xxmaj fragments of triumphant phrases 
▁ pushed themselves through the din : ’ vast strategic manoeuvre — perfect coordination — utter rout — half a million prisoners — complete demoralization 
▁ — control of the whole of xxmaj africa — bring the war within measurable distance of 
▁ its end victory — greatest victory in human history — victory , victory , victory ! ’ 
▁ xxmaj under the table xxmaj winston ’s feet made convulsive movements . xxmaj he had not 
▁ stirred from his seat , but in his mind he was running , swiftly running , he was 
▁ with the crowds outside , cheering himself deaf . xxmaj he looked up again at the 
▁ portrait of xxmaj big xxmaj brother . xxmaj the colossus that bestrode the world ! xxmaj the rock against 
▁ which the hordes of xxmaj asia dashed themselves in vain ! xxmaj he thought how ten minutes 
▁ ago - yes , only ten minutes — there had still been equivocation in his heart as he 
▁ wondered whether the news from the front would be of victory or defeat . xxmaj ah , it 
▁ was more than a xxmaj eurasian army that had perished ! xxmaj much had changed in him 
▁ since that first day in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , but the final , indispensable , healing 
▁ change had never happened , until this moment . 
▁ xxmaj the voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners 
▁ and booty and slaughter , but the shouting outside had died down a little . xxmaj the 
▁ waiters were turning back to their work . xxmaj one of them approached with the 
▁ gin bottle . xxmaj winston , sitting in a blissful dream , paid no attention as his glass 
▁ was filled up . xxmaj he was not running or cheering any longer . xxmaj he was back in the 
▁ xxmaj ministry of xxmaj love , with everything forgiven , his soul white as snow . xxmaj he was in 
▁ the public dock , confessing everything , implicating everybody . xxmaj he was walking 
▁ down the white - tiled corridor , with the feeling of walking in sunlight , and an 
▁ armed guard at his back . xxmaj the longhoped - for bullet was entering his brain . 
▁ xxmaj he gazed up at the enormous face . xxmaj forty years it had taken him to learn 
▁ what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache . o cruel , needless 
▁ misunderstanding ! o stubborn , self - willed exile from the loving breast ! xxmaj two 
▁ gin - scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose . xxmaj but it was all right , 
▁ everything was all right , the struggle was finished . xxmaj he had won the victory over 
▁ 172 
▁ himself . xxmaj he loved xxmaj big xxmaj brother . 
▁ 173 
▁ xxmaj appendix 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj principles of xxmaj newspeak 
▁ xxmaj newspeak was the official language of xxmaj oceania and had been devised to meet 
▁ the ideological needs of xxmaj ingsoc , or xxmaj english xxmaj socialism . xxmaj in the year 1984 there was 
▁ not as yet anyone who used xxmaj newspeak as his sole means of communication , 
▁ either in speech or writing . xxmaj the leading articles in xxmaj the xxmaj times were written in 
▁ it , but this was a tour de force which could only be carried out by a specialist . 
▁ xxmaj it was expected that xxmaj newspeak would have finally superseded xxmaj oldspeak ( or 
▁ xxmaj standard xxmaj english , as we should call it ) by about the year 2050 . xxmaj meanwhile it 
▁ gained ground steadily , all xxmaj party members tending to use xxmaj newspeak words and 
▁ grammatical constructions more and more in their everyday speech . xxmaj the version 
▁ in use in 1984 , and embodied in the xxmaj ninth and xxmaj tenth xxmaj editions of the xxmaj newspeak 
▁ xxmaj dictionary , was a provisional one , and contained many superfluous words and 
▁ archaic formations which were due to be suppressed later . xxmaj it is with the final , 
▁ perfected version , as embodied in the xxmaj eleventh xxmaj edition of the xxmaj dictionary , that 
▁ we are concerned here . 
▁ xxmaj the purpose of xxmaj newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression for 
▁ the world - view and mental habits proper to the devotees of xxmaj ingsoc , but to make 
▁ all other modes of thought impossible . xxmaj it was intended that when xxmaj newspeak had 
▁ been adopted once and for all and xxmaj oldspeak forgotten , a heretical thought — 
▁ that is , a thought diverging from the principles of xxmaj ingsoc — should be literally 
▁ unthinkable , at least so far as thought is dependent on words . xxmaj its vocabulary 
▁ was so constructed as to give exact and often very subtle expression to every 
▁ meaning that a xxmaj party member could properly wish to express , while excluding all other meanings and also the possibility of arriving at them by indirect 
▁ methods . xxmaj this was done partly by the invention of new words , but chiefly by 
▁ eliminating undesirable words and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings , and so far as possible of all secondary meanings whatever . 
▁ xxmaj to give a single example . xxmaj the word free still existed in xxmaj newspeak , but it could 
▁ only be used in such statements as ’ this dog is free from lice ’ or ’ this field 
▁ is free from weeds ’ . xxmaj it could not be used in its old sense of ’ politically free ’ 
▁ or ’ intellectually free ’ since political and intellectual freedom no longer existed 
▁ even as concepts , and were therefore of necessity nameless . xxmaj quite apart from the 
▁ suppression of definitely heretical words , reduction of vocabulary was regarded 
▁ as an end in itself , and no word that could be dispensed with was allowed to 
▁ survive . xxmaj newspeak was designed not to extend but to diminish the range of 
▁ thought , and this purpose was indirectly assisted by cutting the choice of words 
▁ down to a minimum . 
▁ xxmaj newspeak was founded on the xxmaj english language as we now know it , though 
▁ many xxmaj newspeak sentences , even when not containing newly - created words , 
▁ 174 
▁ would be barely intelligible to an xxmaj english - speaker of our own day . xxmaj newspeak 
▁ words were divided into three distinct classes , known as the a vocabulary , the 
▁ b vocabulary ( also called compound words ) , and the c vocabulary . xxmaj it will be 
▁ simpler to discuss each class separately , but the grammatical peculiarities of the 
▁ language can be dealt with in the section devoted to the a vocabulary , since 
▁ the same rules held good for all three categories . 
▁ xxmaj the a vocabulary . 
▁ xxmaj the a vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the business of everyday 
▁ life — for such things as eating , drinking , working , putting on one ’s clothes , 
▁ going up and down stairs , riding in vehicles , gardening , cooking , and the like . xxmaj it 
▁ was composed almost entirely of words that we already possess words like hit , 
▁ run , dog , tree , sugar , house , field — but in comparison with the present - day 
▁ xxmaj english vocabulary their number was extremely small , while their meanings were 
▁ far more rigidly defined . xxmaj all ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged 
▁ out of them . xxmaj so far as it could be achieved , a xxmaj newspeak word of this class was 
▁ simply a staccato sound expressing one clearly understood concept . xxmaj it would 
▁ have been quite impossible to use the a vocabulary for literary purposes or for 
▁ political or philosophical discussion . xxmaj it was intended only to express simple , 
▁ purposive thoughts , usually involving concrete objects or physical actions . 
▁ xxmaj the grammar of xxmaj newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities . xxmaj the first 
▁ of these was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts of 
▁ speech . xxmaj any word in the language ( in principle this applied even to very abstract 
▁ words such as if or when ) could be used either as verb , noun , adjective , or adverb . 
▁ xxmaj between the verb and the noun form , when they were of the same root , there was 
▁ never any variation , this rule of itself involving the destruction of many archaic 
▁ forms . xxmaj the word thought , for example , did not exist in xxmaj newspeak . xxmaj its place 
▁ was taken by think , which did duty for both noun and verb . xxmaj no etymological 
▁ principle was followed here : in some cases it was the original noun that was 
▁ chosen for retention , in other cases the verb . xxmaj even where a noun and verb of 
▁ kindred meaning were not etymologically connected , one or other of them was 
▁ frequently suppressed . xxmaj there was , for example , no such word as cut , its meaning 
▁ being sufficiently covered by the noun - verb knife . xxmaj adjectives were formed by 
▁ adding the suffix - ful to the noun - verb , and adverbs by adding -wise . xxmaj thus for 
▁ example , speedful meant ’ rapid ’ and speedwise meant ’ quickly ’ . xxmaj certain of our 
▁ present - day adjectives , such as good , strong , big , black , soft , were retained , but 
▁ their total number was very small . xxmaj there was little need for them , since almost 
▁ any adjectival meaning could be arrived at by adding - ful to a noun - verb . xxmaj none 
▁ of the now - existing adverbs was retained , except for a very few already ending 
▁ in - wise : the -wise termination was invariable . xxmaj the word well , for example , was 
▁ replaced by goodwise . 
▁ xxmaj in addition , any word — this again applied in principle to every word in the 
▁ language — could be negatived by adding the affix un- or could be strengthened 
▁ by the affix plus- , or , for still greater emphasis , doubleplus- . xxmaj thus , for example , 
▁ uncold meant ’ warm ’ , while pluscold and doublepluscold meant , respectively , 
▁ ’ very cold ’ and ’ superlatively cold ’ . xxmaj it was also possible , as in present - day xxmaj english , to modify the meaning of almost any word by prepositional affixes such 
▁ as ante- , post- , up- , down- , etc . xxmaj by such methods it was found possible to bring 
▁ about an enormous diminution of vocabulary . xxmaj given , for instance , the word 
▁ good , there was no need for such a word as bad , since the required meaning was 
▁ equally well — indeed , better — expressed by ungood . xxmaj all that was necessary , 
▁ 175 
▁ in any case where two words formed a natural pair of opposites , was to decide 
▁ which of them to suppress . xxmaj dark , for example , could be replaced by unlight , or 
▁ light by undark , according to preference . 
▁ xxmaj the second distinguishing mark of xxmaj newspeak grammar was its regularity . 
▁ xxmaj subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions followed 
▁ the same rules . xxmaj thus , in all verbs the preterite and the past participle were the 
▁ same and ended in - ed . xxmaj the preterite of steal was stealed , the preterite of think 
▁ was thinked , and so on throughout the language , all such forms as swam , gave , 
▁ brought , spoke , taken , etc . , being abolished . xxmaj all plurals were made by adding - s 
▁ or - es as the case might be . xxmaj the plurals of man , ox , life , were mans , oxes , lifes . 
▁ xxmaj comparison of adjectives was invariably made by adding - er,-est ( good , gooder , 
▁ goodest ) , irregular forms and the more , most formation being suppressed . 
▁ xxmaj the only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irregularly were the 
▁ pronouns , the relatives , the demonstrative adjectives , and the auxiliary verbs . 
▁ xxmaj all of these followed their ancient usage , except that whom had been scrapped 
▁ as unnecessary , and the shall , should tenses had been dropped , all their uses 
▁ being covered by will and would . xxmaj there were also certain irregularities in wordformation arising out of the need for rapid and easy speech . a word which 
▁ was difficult to utter , or was liable to be incorrectly heard , was held to be ipso 
▁ facto a bad word : occasionally therefore , for the sake of euphony , extra letters 
▁ were inserted into a word or an archaic formation was retained . xxmaj but this need 
▁ made itself felt chiefly in connexion with the b vocabulary . xxmaj why so great an 
▁ importance was attached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in 
▁ this essay . 
▁ xxmaj the b vocabulary . 
▁ xxmaj the b vocabulary consisted of words which had been deliberately constructed for political purposes : words , that is to say , which not only had in 
▁ every case a political implication , but were intended to impose a desirable mental attitude upon the person using them . xxmaj without a full understanding of the 
▁ principles of xxmaj ingsoc it was difficult to use these words correctly . xxmaj in some cases 
▁ they couid be translated into xxmaj oldspeak , or even into words taken from the a 
▁ vocabulary , but this usually demanded a long paraphrase and always involved 
▁ the loss of certain overtones . xxmaj the b words were a sort of verbal shorthand , often 
▁ packing whole ranges of ideas into a few syllables , and at the same time more 
▁ accurate and forcible than ordinary language . 
▁ xxmaj the b words were in all cases compound words . 
▁ xxmaj they consisted of two or more words , or portions of words , welded together in 
▁ an easily pronounceable form . xxmaj the resulting amalgam was always a noun - verb , 
▁ and inflected according to the ordinary rules . xxmaj to take a single example : the 
▁ word goodthink , meaning , very roughly , ’ orthodoxy ’ , or , if one chose to regard 
▁ it as a verb , ’ to think in an orthodox manner ’ . xxmaj this inflected as follows : nounverb , goodthink ; past tense and past participle , goodthinked ; present participle , 
▁ good- thinking ; adjective , goodthinkful ; adverb , goodthinkwise ; verbal noun , 
▁ goodthinker . 
▁ xxmaj the b words were not constructed on any etymological plan . xxmaj the words of 
▁ which they were made up could be any parts of speech , and could be placed 
▁ in any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounce 
▁ while indicating their derivation . xxmaj in the word crimethink ( thoughtcrime ) , for 
▁ instance , the think came second , whereas in thinkpol xxmaj thought xxmaj police ) it came 
▁ first , and in the latter word police had lost its second syllable . xxmaj because of the 
▁ 176 
▁ great difficuity in securing euphony , irregular formations were commoner in the 
▁ b vocabulary than in the a vocabulary . xxmaj for example , the adjective forms of 
▁ xxmaj minitrue , xxmaj minipax , and xxmaj miniluv were , respectively , xxmaj minitruthful , xxmaj minipeaceful , 
▁ and xxmaj minilovely , simply because- trueful,-paxful , and - loveful were slightly awkward to pronounce . xxmaj in principle , however , all b words could inflect , and all 
▁ inflected in exactly the same way . 
▁ xxmaj some of the b words had highly subtilized meanings , barely intelligible to 
▁ anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole . xxmaj consider , for example , 
▁ such a typical sentence from a xxmaj times leading article as xxmaj oldthinkers unbellyfeel 
▁ xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj the shortest rendering that one could make of this in xxmaj oldspeak would 
▁ be : ’ those whose ideas were formed before the xxmaj revolution can not have a full 
▁ emotional understanding of the principles of xxmaj english xxmaj socialism . ’ xxmaj but this is not 
▁ an adequate translation . xxmaj to begin with , in order to 
▁ xxmaj compound words such as speakwrite , were of course to be found in the a 
▁ vocabulary , but these were merely convenient abbreviations and had no special 
▁ ideologcal colour . 
▁ grasp the full meaning of the xxmaj newspeak sentence quoted above , one would 
▁ have to have a clear idea of what is meant by xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj and in addition , only 
▁ a person thoroughly grounded in xxmaj ingsoc could appreciate the full force of the 
▁ word bellyfeel , which implied a blind , enthusiastic acceptance difficult to imagine 
▁ today ; or of the word oldthink , which was inextricably mixed up with the idea 
▁ of wickedness and decadence . xxmaj but the special function of certain xxmaj newspeak 
▁ words , of which oldthink was one , was not so much to express meanings as to 
▁ destroy them . xxmaj these words , necessarily few in number , had had their meanings 
▁ extended until they contained within themselves whole batteries of words which , 
▁ as they were sufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term , could now 
▁ be scrapped and forgotten . xxmaj the greatest difficulty facing the compilers of the 
▁ xxmaj newspeak xxmaj dictionary was not to invent new words , but , having invented them , 
▁ to make sure what they meant : to make sure , that is to say , what ranges of 
▁ words they cancelled by their existence . 
▁ xxmaj as we have already seen in the case of the word free , words which had once 
▁ borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of convenience , 
▁ but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of them . xxmaj countless other 
▁ words such as honour , justice , morality , internationalism , democracy , science , 
▁ and religion had simply ceased to exist . a few blanket words covered them , 
▁ and , in covering them , abolished them . xxmaj all words grouping themselves round 
▁ the concepts of liberty and equality , for instance , were contained in the single 
▁ word crimethink , while all words grouping themselves round the concepts of 
▁ objectivity and rationalism were contained in the single word oldthink . xxmaj greater 
▁ precision would have been dangerous . xxmaj what was required in a xxmaj party member was 
▁ an outlook similar to that of the ancient xxmaj hebrew who knew , without knowing 
▁ much else , that all nations other than his own worshipped ’ false gods ’ . xxmaj he did 
▁ not need to know that these gods were called xxmaj baal , xxmaj osiris , xxmaj moloch , xxmaj ashtaroth , 
▁ and the like : probably the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxy . xxmaj he knew xxmaj jehovah and the commandments of xxmaj jehovah : he knew , therefore , 
▁ that all gods with other names or other attributes were false gods . xxmaj in somewhat the same way , the party member knew what constituted right conduct , 
▁ and in exceedingly vague , generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure 
▁ from it were possible . xxmaj his sexual life , for example , was entirely regulated by 
▁ the two xxmaj newspeak words sexcrime ( sexual immorality ) and goodsex ( chastity ) . 
▁ 177 
▁ xxmaj sexcrime covered all sexual misdeeds whatever . xxmaj it covered fornication , adultery , homosexuality , and other perversions , and , in addition , normal intercourse 
▁ practised for its own sake . xxmaj there was no need to enumerate them separately , 
▁ since they were all equally culpable , and , in principle , all punishable by death . 
▁ xxmaj in the c vocabulary , which consisted of scientific and technical words , it might 
▁ be necessary to give specialized names to certain sexual aberrations , but the 
▁ ordinary citizen had no need of them . xxmaj he knew what was meant by goodsex — 
▁ that is to say , normal intercourse between man and wife , for the sole purpose 
▁ of begetting children , and without physical pleasure on the part of the woman : 
▁ all else was sexcrime . xxmaj in xxmaj newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical 
▁ thought further than the perception that it was heretical : beyond that point 
▁ the necessary words were nonexistent . 
▁ xxmaj no word in the b vocabulary was ideologically neutral . a great many were 
▁ euphemisms . xxmaj such words , for instance , as joycamp ( forced - labour camp ) or 
▁ xxmaj minipax xxmaj ministry of xxmaj peace , i. e. xxmaj ministry of xxmaj war ) meant almost the exact 
▁ opposite of what they appeared to mean . xxmaj some words , on the other hand , 
▁ displayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature of xxmaj oceanic 
▁ society . xxmaj an example was prolefeed , meaning the rubbishy entertainment and 
▁ spurious news which the xxmaj party handed out to the masses . xxmaj other words , again , 
▁ were ambivalent , having the connotation ’ good ’ when applied to the xxmaj party and 
▁ ’ bad ’ when applied to its enemies . xxmaj but in addition there were great numbers of 
▁ words which at first sight appeared to be mere abbreviations and which derived 
▁ their ideological colour not from their meaning , but from their structure . 
▁ xxmaj so far as it could be contrived , everything that had or might have political 
▁ significance of any kind was fitted into the b vocabulary . xxmaj the name of every 
▁ organization , or body of people , or doctrine , or country , or institution , or public 
▁ building , was invariably cut down into the familiar shape ; that is , a single easily 
▁ pronounced word with the smallest number of syllables that would preserve the 
▁ original derivation . xxmaj in the xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth , for example , the xxmaj records xxmaj department , in which xxmaj winston xxmaj smith worked , was called xxmaj recdep , the xxmaj fiction xxmaj department was called xxmaj ficdep , the xxmaj teleprogrammes xxmaj department was called xxmaj teledep , 
▁ and so on . xxmaj this was not done solely with the object of saving time . xxmaj even in the 
▁ early decades of the twentieth century , telescoped words and phrases had been 
▁ one of the characteristic features of political language ; and it had been noticed 
▁ that the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked in totalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations . xxmaj examples were such words as 
▁ xxmaj nazi , xxmaj gestapo , xxmaj comin- tern , xxmaj inprecorr , xxmaj agitprop . xxmaj in the beginning the practice 
▁ had been adopted as it were instinctively , but in xxmaj newspeak it was used with 
▁ a conscious purpose . xxmaj it was perceived that in thus abbreviating a name one 
▁ narrowed and subtly altered its meaning , by cutting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it . xxmaj the words xxmaj communist xxmaj international , for 
▁ instance , call up a composite picture of universal human brotherhood , red flags , 
▁ barricades , xxmaj karl xxmaj marx , and the xxmaj paris xxmaj commune . xxmaj the word xxmaj comintern , on the 
▁ other hand , suggests merely a tightly - knit organization and a well - defined body 
▁ of doctrine . xxmaj it refers to something almost as easily recognized , and as limited 
▁ in purpose , as a chair or a table . xxmaj comintern is a word that can be uttered 
▁ almost without taking thought , whereas xxmaj communist xxmaj international is a phrase 
▁ over which one is obliged to linger at least momentarily . xxmaj in the same way , the 
▁ associations called up by a word like xxmaj minitrue are fewer and more controllable 
▁ than those called up by xxmaj ministry of xxmaj truth . xxmaj this accounted not only for the 
▁ 178 
▁ habit of abbreviating whenever possible , but also for the almost exaggerated 
▁ care that was taken to make every word easily pronounceable . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj newspeak , euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitude of meaning . xxmaj regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when it 
▁ seemed necessary . xxmaj and rightly so , since what was required , above all for political purposes , was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning which could be 
▁ uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in the speaker ’s mind . 
▁ xxmaj the words of the b vocabulary even gained in force from the fact that nearly 
▁ all of them were very much alike . xxmaj almost invariably these words — goodthink , 
▁ xxmaj minipax , prolefeed , sexcrime , joycamp , xxmaj ingsoc , bellyfeel , thinkpol , and countless 
▁ others — were words of two or three syllables , with the stress distributed equally 
▁ between the first syllable and the last . xxmaj the use of them encouraged a gabbling 
▁ style of speech , at once staccato and monotonous . xxmaj and this was exactly what 
▁ was aimed at . xxmaj the intention was to make speech , and especially speech on any 
▁ subject not ideologically neutral , as nearly as possible independent of consciousness . xxmaj for the purposes of everyday life it was no doubt necessary , or sometimes 
▁ necessary , to reflect before speaking , but a xxmaj party member called upon to make a 
▁ political or ethical judgement should be able to spray forth the correct opinions 
▁ as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bullets . xxmaj his training fitted 
▁ him to do this , the language gave him an almost foolproof instrument , and the 
▁ texture of the words , with their harsh sound and a certain wilful ugliness which 
▁ was in accord with the spirit of xxmaj ingsoc , assisted the process still further . 
▁ xxmaj so did the fact of having very few words to choose from . xxmaj relative to our own , 
▁ the xxmaj newspeak vocabulary was tiny , and new ways of reducing it were constantly 
▁ being devised . xxmaj newspeak , indeed , differed from most all other languages in 
▁ that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every year . xxmaj each reduction 
▁ was a gain , since the smaller the area of choice , the smaller the temptation to 
▁ take thought . xxmaj ultimately it was hoped to make articulate speech issue from the 
▁ larynx without involving the higher brain centres at all . xxmaj this aim was frankly 
▁ admitted in the xxmaj newspeak word duckspeak , meaning ’ to quack like a duck ’ . 
▁ xxmaj like various other words in the b vocabulary , duckspeak was ambivalent in 
▁ meaning . xxmaj provided that the opinions which were quacked out were orthodox 
▁ ones , it implied nothing but praise , and when xxmaj the xxmaj times referred to one of the 
▁ orators of the xxmaj party as a doubleplusgood duckspeaker it was paying a warm and 
▁ valued compliment . 
▁ xxmaj the c vocabulary . 
▁ xxmaj the c vocabulary was supplementary to the others and consisted entirely 
▁ of scientific and technical terms . xxmaj these resembled the scientific terms in use 
▁ today , and were constructed from the same roots , but the usual care was taken 
▁ to define them rigidly and strip them of undesirable meanings . xxmaj they followed 
▁ the same grammatical rules as the words in the other two vocabularies . xxmaj very 
▁ few of the c words had any currency either in everyday speech or in political 
▁ speech . xxmaj any scientific worker or technician could find all the words he needed in 
▁ the list devoted to his own speciality , but he seldom had more than a smattering 
▁ of the words occurring in the other lists . xxmaj only a very few words were common 
▁ to all lists , and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of xxmaj science as a 
▁ habit of mind , or a method of thought , irrespective of its particular branches . 
▁ xxmaj there was , indeed , no word for ’ science ’ , any meaning that it could possibly 
▁ bear being already sufficiently covered by the word xxmaj ingsoc . 
▁ xxmaj from the foregoing account it will be seen that in xxmaj newspeak the expression 
▁ 179 
▁ of unorthodox opinions , above a very low level , was well - nigh impossible . xxmaj it was 
▁ of course possible to utter heresies of a very crude kind , a species of blasphemy . 
▁ xxmaj it would have been possible , for example , to say xxmaj big xxmaj brother is ungood . xxmaj but this 
▁ statement , which to an orthodox ear merely conveyed a self - evident absurdity , 
▁ could not have been sustained by reasoned argument , because the necessary 
▁ words were not available . xxmaj ideas inimical to xxmaj ingsoc could only be entertained 
▁ in a vague wordless form , and could only be named in very broad terms which 
▁ lumped together and condemned whole groups of heresies without defining them 
▁ in doing so . xxmaj one could , in fact , only use xxmaj newspeak for unorthodox purposes by 
▁ illegitimately translating some of the words back into xxmaj oldspeak . xxmaj for example , 
▁ xxmaj all mans are equal was a possible xxmaj newspeak sentence , but only in the same 
▁ sense in which xxmaj all men are redhaired is a possible xxmaj oldspeak sentence . xxmaj it did 
▁ not contain a grammatical error , but it expressed a palpable untruth - i.e. that 
▁ all men are of equal size , weight , or strength . xxmaj the concept of political equality 
▁ no longer existed , and this secondary meaning had accordingly been purged 
▁ out of the word equal . xxmaj in 1984 , when xxmaj oldspeak was still the normal means of 
▁ communication , the danger theoretically existed that in using xxmaj newspeak words 
▁ one might remember their original meanings . xxmaj in practice it was not difficult for 
▁ any person well grounded in doublethink to avoid doing this , but within a couple 
▁ of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would have vaished . a person 
▁ growing up with xxmaj newspeak as his sole language would no more know that equal 
▁ had once had the secondary meaning of ’ politically equal ’ , or that free had once 
▁ meant ’ intellectually free ’ , than for instance , a person who had never heard of 
▁ chess would be aware of the secondary meanings attaching to queen and rook . 
▁ xxmaj there would be many crimes and errors which it would be beyond his power 
▁ to commit , simply because they were nameless and therefore unimaginable . 
▁ xxmaj and it was to be foreseen that with the passage of time the distinguishing 
▁ characteristics of xxmaj newspeak would become more and more pronounced — its 
▁ words growing fewer and fewer , their meanings more and more rigid , and the 
▁ chance of putting them to improper uses always diminishing . 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj oldspeak had been once and for all superseded , the last link with 
▁ the past would have been severed . xxmaj history had already been rewritten , but 
▁ fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there , imperfectly censored , and so long as one retained one ’s knowledge of xxmaj oldspeak it was possible 
▁ to read them . xxmaj in the future such fragments , even if they chanced to survive , 
▁ would be unintelligible and untranslatable . xxmaj it was impossible to translate any 
▁ passage of xxmaj oldspeak into xxmaj newspeak unless it either referred to some technical 
▁ process or some very simple everyday action , or was already orthodox ( goodthinkful would be the newspeak expression ) in tendency . xxmaj in practice this meant 
▁ that no book written before approximately 1960 could be translated as a whole . 
▁ xxmaj pre - revolutionary literature could only be subjected to ideological translation — 
▁ that is , alteration in sense as well as language . xxmaj take for example the well - known 
▁ passage from the xxmaj declaration of xxmaj independence : 
▁ xxmaj we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that 
▁ they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights , that among 
▁ these are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness . xxmaj that to secure these rights , 
▁ xxmaj governments are instituted among men , deriving their powers from the consent 
▁ of the governed . xxmaj that whenever any form of xxmaj government becomes destructive 
▁ of those ends , it is the right of the xxmaj people to alter or abolish it , and to institute 
▁ new xxmaj government … 
▁ 180 
▁ xxmaj it would have been quite impossible to render this into xxmaj newspeak while 
▁ keeping to the sense of the original . xxmaj the nearest one could come to doing so 
▁ would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word crimethink . a full 
▁ translation could only be an ideological translation , whereby xxmaj jefferson ’s words 
▁ would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government . 
▁ a good deal of the literature of the past was , indeed , already being transformed in this way . xxmaj considerations of prestige made it desirable to preserve 
▁ the memory of certain historical figures , while at the same time bringing their 
▁ achievements into line with the philosophy of xxmaj ingsoc . xxmaj various writers , such as 
▁ xxmaj shakespeare , xxmaj milton , xxmaj swift , xxmaj byron , xxmaj dickens , and some others were therefore in 
▁ process of translation : when the task had been completed , their original writings , with all else that survived of the literature of the past , would be destroyed . 
▁ xxmaj these translations were a slow and difficult business , and it was not expected 
▁ that they would be finished before the first or second decade of the twentyfirst century . xxmaj there were also large quantities of merely utilitarian literature 
▁ — indispensable technical manuals , and the like — that had to be treated in 
▁ the same way . xxmaj it was chiefly in order to allow time for the preliminary work 
▁ of translation that the final adoption of xxmaj newspeak had been fixed for so late a 
▁ date as 2050 . 
▁ 181